Despite the unprecedented success of the coronavirus vaccine , Covid’s unpredictability has made the virus incredibly difficult to suppress.
The rapid evolution of the virus has also caused great challenges in tracking symptoms.
With more than 300 subvariants of Omicron currently in circulation, doctors are highlighting some of the most frequently encountered signs of the latest strain.
Maria Van Kerkhove, Infection Disease Epidemiologist with the WHO Health Emergencies Programme recently warned: “Right now we’re in a situation where we have more than 300 sub-variants of Omicron that are in circulation, and these sub-variants are quite similar to each other.”
The classic symptoms of the variant are currently a cough, which may be chronic or develop into bronchitis.
Fatigue may also interfere with a person’s daily activities, as may headaches, fever, runny nose, and itchy throat.
Irritation of the throat has also been tied with reports of difficulty swallowing and muscle pain, which is medically known as odynophagia.
READ MORE:
Pharmacist shares how to identify and treat colds, flu and Covid
Do not go to the E.R. for mild symptoms and injuries, Telehealth is still available.
MEMPHIS, Tenn. —
A Facebook post is going viral after the Memphis Fire Department tells people they do not need to go to the emergency room for every little thing, including your mild covid symptoms or testing.
Health professionals said patients are experiencing long wait times in the E.R. right now because people are crowding the waiting area for minor symptoms like a sore throat, cough, or headache.
Many comments under the MFD post had people explaining they are going to the er for those symptoms because it's their only option.
Family nurse practitioner Collin Hardwick said some of those minor illnesses include coughs, headaches, rashes, or a sore throat.
"The ER's aren't meant for minor illness," he said.
"The E.R. is meant for patients who are severely ill or require urgent medical attention.
"
But people commenting on the Facebook post said they don't have a choice.
Some comments read their family doctor won't see them if they have COVID symptoms and other comments show it's taking weeks to get an appointment with their primary care physician.
"I do know a few doctors that haven't allowed covid positive patients into their office, but we are going on two-plus years in this pandemic, it's going to take primary care providers seeing covid patients to help," Hardwick said.
Hardwick said patients also have to remember that primary care is seeing an increase in patient volume and just like every other industry, health care is experiencing a staffing shortage.
For quicker and most of the time same-day services, Telehealth is still an option.
Hardwick said, you can ask your family doctor or go through your insurance company to see if a virtual doctor's appointment is an option for you.
"We can see them just like what we are doing on zoom except for its HIPPA complaint," Hardwick said.
"We can see the patient, make a decision on should they need to go to the E.R., or if they really need to come to the office to be seen or we can we start them on some medication and get them treated."
WASHINGTON —
The Pentagon is asking all military personnel, civilian officials and contractors to report any anomalous health episodes similar to the illnesses that have befallen diplomats and C.I.A. officers at the American Embassy in Havana, according to a new departmentwide message.
The message, signed by Defense Secretary Lloyd J. Austin III, is an effort to step up reporting from around the globe, and in the United States, to get treatment to those who need it and to help counterintelligence investigators gather more information about the rash of episodes that have injured at least 200 Americans.
The memo, along with other documents provided to military counterintelligence officials, lays out suspected signs of the attacks from accounts of the injured, including heat, pressure and noise.
It also details symptoms associated with the so-called Havana syndrome such as nausea, headaches, pain and vertigo.
Crucially, defense officials emphasized, the memo, which was sent to 2.9 million military service members and Defense Department civilians, outlines how to respond: Quickly move away from the area.
Despite the seasonality of influenza activity, many people experience flu-like symptoms during the summer.
Although the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) detects influenza viruses year-round, these symptoms may not be due to an actual influenza infection.
The flu is a highly contagious respiratory infection caused by the influenza virus.
The virus causes seasonal epidemics of respiratory illness that occur during the fall and winter months.
The flu is traditionally thought of as an illness that strikes in the fall and winter.
But many people experience flu-like symptoms in the summer months.
Additionally, lower levels of vitamin D due to less exposure to sunlight could possibly contribute to an increased susceptibility to infection.
Another factor that may contribute to influenza peaking in the winter could be the fact that people spend more time indoors.
This makes them more likely to share an enclosed space with individuals who have the virus.
A 2007 study in a guinea pig model supports this idea, finding that influenza viruses are transmitted more effectively between animals at a low humidity and low temperature.
It’s believed that the seasonal nature of influenza may be due to the colder, drier climate that’s present during the winter months.
During this time, the virus may be more stable.
Flu season is when influenza activity is highest.
The incidence of influenza infection typically begins to increase in October and peaks in the winter months of December, January, or February.
The symptoms of flu are also common symptoms of other illnesses.
If you’re experiencing flu-like symptoms during the warmer months of the year, they may be due to another illness or condition.
When you have the flu, symptoms typically come on suddenly.
They can include:
Some possible conditions that may give you flu-like symptoms in the summer include:
Common cold
The common cold is another respiratory infection caused by a variety of viruses.
There’s a lot of overlap between the symptoms of the common cold and those of the flu, such as a runny nose or congestion, coughing or sneezing, and sore throat.
But unlike the flu, the symptoms of the common cold develop gradually and are most often less severe.
There are other differences between a cold and flu as well.
Gastroenteritis
Although gastroenteritis is often referred to as the stomach flu, it’s not related to influenza.
It’s often caused by a number of viruses, such as noroviruses or rotaviruses.
Common symptoms of gastroenteritis and flu include fever, headache, and body aches and pains.
In contrast to the flu, the symptoms of gastroenteritis are more focused around your gastrointestinal tract and may include watery diarrhea and abdominal cramps.
Pneumonia
Pneumonia is an infection of your lungs.
While it can be a complication of the flu, there are also other causes.
These include other viruses, bacteria, fungi, and certain chemical or environmental agents.
The common initial symptoms can be very similar to those of the flu and can include fever, chills, and headache.
Symptoms to look out for that can point specifically to pneumonia include cough with green or yellow mucus, shortness of breath, and sharp chest pain.
Bronchitis
Bronchitis is an inflammation of the bronchial tubes in your lungs.
Like pneumonia, bronchitis can sometimes be caused by the flu virus.
However, it can also be caused by other viruses or environmental factors such as cigarette smoke.
Overlapping symptoms between the two conditions include cough, fever, chills, and fatigue or malaise.
Similar to pneumonia, symptoms to look out for that may indicate bronchitis include a cough with mucus, shortness of breath, and discomfort in your chest.
Food poisoning
You get food poisoning by consuming food that contains pathogens, such as viruses, bacteria, or parasites.
Unlike with the flu, food poisoning symptoms are focused on your gastrointestinal tract and include nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and fever.
You may notice symptoms shortly after consuming contaminated food, although they may take days or weeks to appear.
Lyme disease
Lyme disease is caused by a type of bacteria that’s spread through the bite of a tick.
If left untreated, it can cause serious complications.
The early symptoms of Lyme disease can be very similar to those of the flu and can include fever, chills, body aches and pains, and fatigue.
Most people with Lyme disease also have a characteristic bull’s-eye rash at the site of the tick bite.
But the rash doesn’t occur in all people.
In some cases, Lyme disease has been mistaken for a summer case of the flu.
If you’re experiencing flu-like symptoms and have a tick bite, or live or have traveled in an area where Lyme disease occurs, you should contact your doctor and let them know.
COVID-19
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar to the flu in many ways.
Like the flu, COVID-19 can cause fever and chills, cough, shortness of breath, headache, and vomiting.
COVID-19 is not related to the flu, but is instead caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
Diarrhea among adults is more common with COVID-19 than the flu.
Another key difference is that COVID-19 symptoms may take longer to show up after exposure.
Flu symptoms usually occur within 1–4 days whereas COVID-19 symptoms may occur any time between 2 and 14 days, according to the CDC .
COVID-19 tends to lead to more serious complications than flu, including death.
If you start to experience what may seem to be flu symptoms, it’s a good idea to test yourself or get tested for COVID-19.
A woman is urging people to recognise symptoms of leukaemia after undergoing special treatment following a shock diagnosis as a student.
Sophie Wheldon, 24, from Solihull, said she dismissed her lingering chest infection, headaches and neck pain as stress while she studied.
But after seeing her GP and then going to hospital, she was diagnosed with the blood disease in 2018.
Leukaemia UK said fewer than 1% of people were able to identify symptoms.
Four of the most widely reported symptoms included fatigue, bruising, unusual bleeding and repeated infections, the charity said.
Sign up to our free Living Well email for advice on living a happier, healthier and longer life Live your life healthier and happier with our free weekly Living Well newsletter Please enter a valid email address Please enter a valid email address SIGN UP
I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent.
Read our privacy notice Thanks for signing up to the
Living Well email {{ #verifyErrors }} {{ message }} {{ /verifyErrors }} {{ ^verifyErrors }} Something went wrong.
Please try again later {{ /verifyErrors }}
Cancer campaigner Dame Deborah James died in June 2022, aged 40, after being diagnosed with incurable bowel cancer six years prior.
James, who was awarded a damehood last May for her tireless efforts in raising awareness of the disease, was committed to showing that it is possible to live a full life with cancer.
At the time of writing, James’s BowelBabe fund has raised £11.3m for Cancer Research UK.
And now, her journey is documented in the shattering BBC Two film BowelBabe in Her Own Words.
In her final words released by her family, James said: “Find a life worth enjoying; take risks; love deeply; have no regrets; and always, always have rebellious hope.
And finally, check your poo – it could just save your life.”
Bowel cancer is the fourth most common cancer in the UK, with nearly 43,000 people diagnosed with the disease every year in the country.
It is also the second biggest cancer killer, according to Bowel Cancer UK, behind only lung cancer.
Bowel cancer claims the lives of more than 16,500 Britons a year, equivalent to 45 people each day.
The charity, whose patrons include actors Tom Hardy and Rupert Evans, says that while bowel cancer is more common in people over the age of 50, it can affect people of all ages, with more than 2,600 people under 50 diagnosed with is in the UK every year.
James, who was diagnosed with stage four bowel cancer in 2016 at the age of 35, revealed in May last year that she had moved to in-home hospice care.
Dame Deborah James was diagnosed with stage four bowel cancer aged 35 ( PA Media )
James raised more than £6 million through her Bowelbabe fund for Cancer Research UK, Bowel Cancer UK and the Royal Marsden Cancer Charity, far surpassing her initial target of £250,000.
Other famous faces who have openly shared their journeys with bowel cancer include BBC Radio 1 presenter Adele Roberts.
In May 2022, Roberts appeared on the cover of Women’s Health magazine with her stoma bag also pictured.
She recently revealed she is cancer free after her “shock” diagnosis in October last year.
James spoke out about her symptoms and treatments to raise awareness on how others can identify the signs of bowel cancer and seek medical advice as early as possible.
So what are the symptoms of bowel cancer and how can it be treated?
Here's everything you need to know:
What is bowel cancer?
Bowel cancer, otherwise known as colorectal cancer, affects the large bowel, Bowel Cancer UK states.
The large bowel, also known as the large intestine, is made up of your colon and rectum.
When the cells in the body begin to divide and multiply in an uncontrolled manner, this leads to the development of cancer, Cancer Research UK explains.
While bowel cancer is more likely to develop in the large bowel than the small bowel, small bowel cancer can still occur.
The small bowel contains the duodenum, the part of the intestine which connects to the stomach, and the ileum, the part of the intestine which connects to the large bowel.
When cells have become cancerous in the large bowel, they may spread to other areas of the body, such as the liver or lungs.
This is called advanced bowel cancer.
What are the symptoms of bowel cancer?
Symptoms of bowel cancer can include a change in your bowel habits, ​blood in stool, weight loss, pain in your abdomen or back, fatigue and feeling as though you need to strain your back package, even after going to the toilet, Cancer Research UK outlines.
Another potential symptom of bowel cancer includes tenesmus, which is the feeling of having to defecate without having stools, or experiencing pain upon defecation.
Cancer may also cause bowel obstruction, which is when passing stool or gas is either harder than usual or impossible.
When bowel obstruction occurs, you may experience cramping, bloating, constipation or nausea.
It's advised that you see your doctor or go to A&E immediately if you think you may have a bowel obstruction.
The NHS adds that experiencing symptoms associated with bowel cancer, such as abdominal discomfort and constipation, may not necessarily be indicative of bowel cancer.
Signs of bowel cancer in women tend to be the same as those seen in men.
In its early stages, the disease may have no noticeable symptoms, according to Healthline.
For more information on symptoms of bowel cancer, visit the NHS here and Cancer Research UK here.
How many people does bowel cancer affect?
Around 42,000 people in the UK are diagnosed with bowel cancer every year, Bowel Cancer UK states.
This equates to around 115 new cases of bowel cancer every day.
The majority of cases, more than nine in 10, occur in people over the age of 50, with around six in 10 occurring in people over the age of 70.
However, bowel cancer can affect individuals at any age.
Men are more likely than women to be diagnosed with bowel cancer.
One in 15 men are likely to be diagnosed with bowel cancer in their lifetimes, in comparison to one in 18 women.
How is bowel cancer tested?
When being tested for bowel cancer, your GP will ask whether you have a history of bowel cancer in the your family, the NHS explains.
They will then likely conduct a rectal examination, which involves a doctor or nurse placing a gloved finger inside your rectum to check for any lumps.
Your blood will also be tested for iron deficiency, as those with bowel cancer may have a lack of iron in their blood due to bleeding.
Recommended New drug shows promise in treating bowel cancer
If the tests indicate that you may have bowel cancer, you'll then be referred to a hospital to undergo a flexible sigmoidoscopy.
During a flexible sigmoidoscopy, a long, thin tube called a sigmoidoscope with a camera and light attached will be inserted into your rectum and into the lower part of your large bowel.
You may also undergo a colonoscopy, which is similar to a flexible sigmoidoscopy but examines the entire large bowel.
Another form of test used to diagnose bowel cancer is a computed tomography (CT) colonography, which uses CT scans to examine the colon and rectum.
How can bowel cancer be treated?
The measures used to treat bowel cancer may vary depending on which part of the bowel is affected.
The most common form of treatment for bowel cancer is surgery, the NHS outlines.
This may be paired with chemotherapy, radiotherapy or biological treatments.
If bowel cancer is detected at an early stage, it may be cured completely.
However, if the cancerous tumour cannot be removed completely through surgery, then a cure may not be possible, the NHS states.
For more information about treatment for bowel cancer, visit the NHS here and Cancer Research UK here.
To speak to a Cancer Research UK nurse, you can call 0808 800 4040.
The helpline is free and open from Monday to Friday, from 9am until 5pm.
‘BowelBabe in Her Own Words’ airs at 9pm on BBC Two on Monday 17 April.
As high levels of COVID-19 transmission persist, people continue to wonder how long they should isolate after learning they're infected.
One especially perplexing predicament is what to do when you continue to see positive results on a rapid antigen test, but it's been 5 days (or more) and your symptoms have resolved.
So, what could cause someone to continue to test positive?
It may be due to weakened virus that continues to replicate, Benjamin tenOever, PhD, a microbiologist at NYU Grossman School of Medicine, told MedPage Today.
It may also happen as a result of broken virus genomes.
Because the Omicron variant tends to stay localized in the upper respiratory tract, especially in those who are vaccinated and boosted, that may lead to more nucleocapsid protein in the back of the throat and nose, he said.
And broken virus genomes can remain present after viruses make bad versions of themselves.
"If you are testing antigen positive, you should assume a low level of virus infection," tenOever said.
"You are possibly transmissible.
"
This possibility may be difficult to grapple with on the heels of recently updated guidance from the CDC.
Last month, the CDC announced that those testing positive for COVID-19 could isolate for just 5 days if they are asymptomatic, down from a previous recommendation of 10 days.
Though the CDC has since clarified that rapid antigen testing towards the end of that period is the best approach, the agency hasn't directed people to seek it out.
This approach differs from that of the U.K., which just this week updated its own guidance to say that people can stop isolating after 5 days only if they have two negative rapid antigen tests taken on consecutive days.
The first test should not be taken before the fifth day after symptoms have started (or the day a test was taken if symptoms were not present), the U.K. Health Security Agency stated.
The isolation period remains 10 days for people without negative results from two tests on consecutive days.
The CDC noted that the reduced isolation period was prompted by data that suggest most transmission "occurs early in the course of illness, generally in the 1-2 days prior to onset of symptoms and the 2-3 days after.
"
A paper published in The Lancet in December, and cited by CDC in its updated guidance, found that "[e]vidence from 113 studies done in 17 countries shows that SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA can be detected as early as 6 days before symptom onset, concentrations peak around the time of symptom onset or a few days later, and it usually becomes undetectable from upper respiratory tract samples about 2 weeks after symptom onset, and with no substantial differences between adults and children.
"
These studies suggest that "the mean period of infectiousness and risk of transmission could be restricted to the period between 2 and 3 days before and 8 days after symptom onset.
"
However, these data pre-date the Omicron surge.
And the CDC's latest approach to isolation isn't foolproof.
A new study from Harvard University that looked at a small number of cases from the National Basketball Association's COVID-19 testing program found that more than half of Omicron cases identified within a day of a previous negative test were still infectious 5 days after a first positive test, dipping to 25% on day six and 13% on day seven.
The study -- which was not peer-reviewed -- used PCR testing.
Isolation periods, testing out of them, and the possibility of lingering infectiousness are definitely being discussed in medical circles
, Geoffrey Baird, MD, PhD, chair of the department of laboratory medicine and pathology at the University of Washington School of Medicine in Seattle, told MedPage Today.
This is especially relevant when it comes to staffing shortages that are occurring across the country.
Overall, the question of "what is the real value of the test on any one specific day" persists, Baird said.
"This is the challenge of doing public health.
"
It's about striking a balance between what is "medically right and accepted by the population," he added.
Ultimately, the country will need to determine how it will use rapid antigen tests going forward and whether that includes testing out of isolation, he said.
The percentage of people that would continue to test positive days or even weeks after their symptoms have subsided is likely very limited, tenOever pointed out.
If it is well beyond 10 days and you are still testing positive, seeking out further medical advice or evaluation may be warranted.
Jennifer Henderson joined MedPage Today as an enterprise and investigative writer in Jan. 2021.
She has covered the healthcare industry in NYC, life sciences and the business of law, among other areas.
Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
Covid symptoms: Professor says range should be expanded
COVID-19 causes symptoms which can be obvious for up to 10 days.
People with more severe forms of the disease will take longer to recover and can be up to two weeks.
There are seven uncommon signs of COVID-19 experts warn people should be aware of as they may indicate a COVID-19 infection.
READ MORE AstraZeneca vaccine side effects: Headache symptoms - call 111 According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), the main symptoms of coronavirus usually include: A dry cough
A temperature
Tiredness/lethargy
Shortness of breath (in more severe cases)
Loss of taste and smell Some patients may have "aches and pains, nasal congestion, runny nose, sore throat or diarrhoea", WHO adds.
"These symptoms are usually mild and begin gradually.”
However, there are a good few other symptoms experts warn, although uncommon, one should still be aware of.
READ MORE:
Dr Amir reveals how many days should pass after jab before blood clotting symptoms appear
Covid symptoms update: The seven uncommon signs warning of a COVID-19 infection
Symptoms that have been reported but are not officially recognised includes: Skin rash on fingers and toes Data from Zoe Covid symptom study app, looking at reported symptoms of those in the UK, suggests that some people who suffered with Covid-19 noted changes to their skin including their fingers and toes.
It is not clear what causes these changes but could be linked to the immune response to the virus.
The rashes are usually itchy and may make it difficult to sleep and can appear as prickly heat or chickenpox-type rash, which is the most common itchy red bumps.
Covid tongue Some people are reporting to the Zoe Covid app changes to their mouth and tongue.
These include mouth ulcers and their tongue appearing coated or patchy.
Other changes include having a dry mouth and fungal infections as well as pain or muscle aches while chewing. DON'T
MISS AstraZeneca blood clot:
Dr Amir Khan warns of blood clot symptoms to spot after jab[INSIGHT] Diabetes type 2 symptoms: The smell of your urine can be a sign - what to sniff for[EXPERT ADVICE] How to live longer: Three longevity tips that do not involve diet or exercise - expert tip
[EXCLUSIVE]
Trending
SUBSCRIBE Invalid email We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you.
This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding.
You can unsubscribe at any time.
Read our Privacy Policy
Hoarse voice A hoarse voice isn’t a very common symptom of Covid-19; however, during the beginning of the pandemic lots of clinical staff reported experiencing a hoarse voice during their illness which affected the speech.
A hoarse voice can sound, and feel, different from person to person.
Some may notice their voice is more croaky, raspy, or rough, quieter or even changes in pitch.
If you have a hoarse voice, you might feel like it requires more effort to speak.
COVID-19 virus affects the tissues in a person’s respiratory system of which the voice box (larynx) is a part of.
Chest pain A small amount of people using the Zoe Symptom app experienced significant chest pains, but it is important to remember chest pains can be a sign of something seriously wrong, like a heart attack of blood clot in the lung.
It is likely caused by the virus directly affecting muscles and lungs.
While it is rare, people with Covid who experience chest pains have a higher risk of needing hospital support, especially if the chest pain is alongside confusion or shortness of breath.
Covid symptoms update: Delirium is a lesser-known sign of the virus to look out for
READ MORE Sabine Schmitz had three-year battle with cancer - seven signs to spot Abdominal pains Some Covid-19 patients have reported experiencing tummy ache just before developing the other known symptoms including fever, cough and shortness of breath.
In fact, a study published in the American Journal of Gastroenterology, suggests that people might experience digestive issues which could signal an infection, and this could include diarrhoea.
Researchers analysed data from 204 patients with Covid-19 in China’s Hubei province and discovered that a staggering 48.5 percent of these patients arrived at the hospital and were suffering from digestive issues.
Symptoms of COVID-19
More than 70% of women with high-risk early ovarian cancer had one or more symptoms of underlying disease, most often abdominal or pelvic pain, a large retrospective review showed.
Almost a third of the 419 patients reported abdominal or pelvic pain, and one-fourth complained of fullness or increased abdominal girth.
Less commonly, patients reported abnormal vaginal bleeding, urinary symptoms, or gastrointestinal symptoms.
A third of the patients reported more than one symptom.
The number of symptoms increased with tumor size but not with patient age, disease stage, or histologic subtype.
The findings suggest that the widely held perception of ovarian cancer as a "silent disease" is inaccurate, reported John K. Chan, MD, of Palo Alto Medical Foundation/California Pacific/Sutter Research Institute in San Francisco, and coauthors, in Obstetrics & Gynecology.
"One of these five common symptoms identified in this current report can potentially be used to evaluate patients for early-stage ovarian cancer," the authors said of their findings.
A prior comprehensive literature review showed that 95% of patients with ovarian cancer had associated symptoms.
The lower prevalence of symptoms in the current study probably reflected the fact that all patients had early-stage disease, the authors continued.
"Additional research is warranted to evaluate symptom awareness in early-stage cancers and possibly incorporating novel serum biomarkers and wearable monitoring devices," Chan and coauthors concluded.
"As one of the few studies that describe symptoms of high-risk early-stage ovarian cancer, our data showed that more than 70% of patients present with one or more symptoms.
Thus, even in early-stage disease, ovarian cancer is not necessarily a silent disease.
"
The study poked holes in the "myth" that only women with advanced-stage ovarian cancer have associated symptoms, according to the author of an accompanying editorial.
"Many healthcare professionals are seemingly unaware of the symptoms typically associated with ovarian cancer, so misdiagnosis remains common," wrote Barbara Goff, MD, of the University of Washington in Seattle.
The findings added to evidence from clinical surveys showing that more than 90% of women with early-stage ovarian cancer reported having symptoms prior to diagnosis.
"Both patients and healthcare professionals should be educated about these symptoms, and we all need a high index of suspicion in symptomatic patients to avoid delays in diagnosis," she concluded.
"Women with early-stage disease have survival rates that are more than double those in women with advanced-stage disease.
Therefore, symptom recognition with appropriate diagnostic testing remains very important in our efforts to improve outcomes.
"
A majority of ovarian cancers continue to be diagnosed in advanced stages, most of which will recur and subsequently develop chemoresistance.
Early-stage diagnosis could influence overall survival but remains challenging, Chan and coauthors noted.
Multiple studies have documented that most patients with ovarian cancer have symptoms but, in the majority of cases, symptoms are nonspecific and reported most often by patients with advanced-stage disease.
In an effort to home in on symptoms associated with early-stage ovarian cancer, the authors retrospectively reviewed records for patients who participated in the phase III GOG 157 trial of surgically staged ovarian cancer.
The trial included 427 patients with high-risk early disease, of whom 419 had information related presence of symptoms at diagnosis.
Overall, 301 (72%) patients reported one or more symptoms and 118 (28%) were asymptomatic.
The proportion of patients with multiple symptoms increased significantly with tumor size, from 23% of patients with tumors ≤10 cm to 46% of those with tumors >15 cm (P<0.001).
Similarly, the proportion of patients with any symptoms increased with tumor size from 65% to 79%.
No other demographic or clinicopathologic features had significant associations with symptoms.
Neither relapse-free survival nor overall survival correlated with symptom status.
Abdominal/pelvic pain and fullness/increased abdominal girth accounted for a majority of patient-reported symptoms.
In addition, 13% of patients reported vaginal bleeding, 10% reported urinary symptoms, and 5% reported gastrointestinal symptoms.
"It is unclear whether the characteristic symptoms of patients with early-stage disease differ from those with advanced-stage disease," the authors stated.
Charles Bankhead is senior editor for oncology and also covers urology, dermatology, and ophthalmology.
He joined MedPage Today in 2007.
Follow
Disclosures Chan disclosed relationships with AbbVie, Acerta, Aravive, AstraZeneca, Clovis, Eisai, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Myriad, Roche, and Seagen.
Goff reported having no relevant relationships with industry.
Primary Source Obstetrics & Gynecology Source Reference: Chan JK, et al "Symptoms of women with high-risk early-stage ovarian cancer" Obstet Gynecol 2022; DOI: 10.1097/AOG.0000000000004642.
Secondary Source Obstetrics & Gynecology Source Reference: Goff BA "Ovarian cancer is not so silent" Obstet Gynecol 2022; DOI: 10.1097/AOG.0000000000004664.
Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
"Without adequate testing, I don't think you can know for sure.
"
Doctors and researchers still have much to learn about the exact symptoms caused by COVID-19, but a group of ear, nose and throat doctors now suspect two such symptoms may be an altered sense of taste, called dysgeusia, and a loss of smell, known as anosmia.
In a statement released earlier this week, the American Academy of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery reported: "Anecdotal evidence is rapidly accumulating from sites around the world that anosmia and dysgeusia are significant symptoms associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Anosmia, in particular, has been seen in patients ultimately testing positive for the coronavirus with no other symptoms.
"
But many other viral infections, including the common cold, similarly can impair one's senses.
About 40% of patients recovering from a viral illness report a loss of smell, according to Dr. D.J. Verret, who's double board certified in otolaryngology, head and neck, and facial plastic surgery.
Tune into ABC at 1 p.m. ET and ABC News Live at 4 p.m. ET every weekday for special coverage of the novel coronavirus with the full ABC News team, including the latest news, context and analysis.
"The sense of taste and smell are very closely related," he said.
"We know from previous research that coronavirus infections are seen in post-viral anosmia.
It is therefore not a stretch to think that COVID-19, caused by a coronavirus, can result in smell or taste disturbances.
"
According to a case report from Taiwan, a woman infected with SARS, a close cousin of COVID-19, lost her sense of smell for more than two years.
There isn't yet significant data linking COVID-19 to altered senses of smell or taste, but the anecdotal evidence is growing.
People line up to get a test at Elmhurst Hospital during the coronavirus outbreak, March 24, 2020 in the Queens borough of New York City.
Eduardo Munoz Alvarez/Getty Images
"The good news is that the symptoms seem to be self-limiting and improve with time," said Dr. Wendy Smith, an otolaryngologist at Permanente Medical Group.
"Up to two-thirds of post-viral anosmia cases resolve spontaneously.
This typically occurs within six to 12 months.
Cases related to COVID19 may resolve more quickly.
"
ENT U.K. at The Royal College of Surgeons of England, a professional society of ear, nose and throat physicians, has reported a significant number of COVID-19 patients from South Korea, China, Germany and Italy experienced a decreased or lost sense of smell -- as many as 30% in South Korea, where patients said it was accompanied by milder symptoms.
Doctors in countries where COVID-19 has spread have reported that some people whose only apparent symptom is a loss of smell may not have been tested for the virus and could unwittingly be spreading it.
But many other individuals experience a loss of smell for afflictions wholly unrelated to COVID-19: nasal and sinus disease, head trauma, Alzheimer’s, Parkinson's, stroke, brain tumors, aging, certain medications, tobacco, diabetes, hypothyroidism and exposure to chemical, toxins or metals.
With spring approaching, seasonal allergies also could be the cause of someone's lost or altered senses of smell or taste.
The American Academy of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery wants the loss of smell and altered taste added to list of symptoms considered for COVID-19 screenings.
And doctors who see such patients may need to consider self-isolating until tested and cleared of COVID-19.
"Without adequate testing, I don't think you can know for sure," Verret added.
"My advice would be to self-quarantine if you have new onset of these symptoms, and be sure to let any healthcare providers you come into contact with know that you have the symptom.
"
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention lists symptoms of the new coronavirus as fever, cough and shortness of breath, and that there's currently no treatment or vaccine.
Anyone not in immediate distress or requiring emergency attention should stay home and alert a doctor.
Angela N. Baldwin M.D., M.P.H., is a pathology resident at Montefiore Health Systems in New York City and a contributor to the ABC News Medical Unit.
A case report published in The New England Journal of Medicine highlights the range of possible symptoms: “Over the course of two months, a 62-year old man developed numbness and a ‘pins and needles’ sensation in his hands, had trouble walking, experience severe joint pain, began turning yellow, and became progressively short of breath.
"
As Harvard Health points out, this case report does not capture the full list of symptoms, however.
In addition to deep depression, paranoia and delusions, memory loss, and incontinence, loss of taste and smell has also been observed in patients with low B12 levels.
The link to loss of smell is attributed to the damage B12 deficiency inflicts on the nervous system.
READ MORE: Vitamin B12 deficiency symptoms: The unusual sign on your skin to watch out for
RACHEL JOHNSON ADMITS IF SHE WERE DOMINIC
CUMMINGS SHE WOULD HAVE ADMITTED TO 'MESSING UP'
RACHEL JOHNSON ADMITS IF SHE WERE DOMINIC
CUMMINGS SHE WOULD HAVE ADMITTED TO 'MESSING UP'
Rachel Johnson has told that she is convinced she had the coronavirus after noticing "itchy red bumps" on two of her toes
Boris Johnson's TV and radio presenter sister has shared her suspicions that she thinks she had the coronavirus.
Rachel Johnson, 54, has opened up on believing she suffered from so-called 'Covid Toe' - a rash that appears on feet, which medical professionals think could be a sign of the deadly virus.
Writing in a column for the Daily Mail, the sister of the Prime Minister shared how after noticing "two of my toes were pink Wall's cocktail chipolatas covered in itchy red bumps" and seeing an article titled How To Spot Covid Toe that she was convinced that she was infected.
Image: Getty Images for Dior) Getty Images for Dior)
Sharing on a conversation with her husband on her self-diagnosis, she penned: "I announced: ‘Well, that proves it!
I definitely had Covid Toe.
(I could swear I had the tell-tale red ‘maculopapules’ on two toes of my left foot), which means I did have Covid in February after all when I came back from Venice and was laid out with a streaming cold for five days.
"
Rachel also detailed that she had another symptom which she explained as a "sort of electric … flashing feeling" where her skin "goes all crawly".
Wanting to know if she had the disease, Rachel went on to share that she forked out £100 for a private antibody test.
Sharing on the results and how she believes it confirms her suspicions, she told: "My antibody test was negative, but I’m still convinced I had it and am, therefore, right!"
Image: REUTERS) REUTERS)
Rachel recently admitted that her brother Boris seems like a "different person" amid the coronavirus pandemic.
The author and journalist, made the admission when appearing on The Jeremy Vine Show via video link in March, said that she watched one of his addresses to the nation, she felt "sympathy for him".
She also said that "everyone's lives are in his hands" and that "his job couldn't be harder".
Speaking to host Jeremy, she revealed that she had been forced to cancel all of the events to promote her new book Rake’s Progress: My Political Midlife Crisis.
Image: Brett Cove/SOPA Images/REX/Shutterstock) Brett Cove/SOPA Images/REX/Shutterstock)
However, Jeremy went on to ask her about the prime minister, commenting: "I am seeing a different person.
"
Rachel agreed, saying: "This is an unprecedented time...
this could not be more serious.
"
She continued: "We have never faced anything like this before as a nation or world...
it's a matter of life or death.
"
"I watched his address to the nation last night," Rachel added.
"One can't help but feel sympathy ...
everyone's lives are in his hands and his job couldn't be harder.
"
Do you have a story to sell?
Get in touch with us at webcelebs@trinitymirror.com or call us direct 0207 29 33033
In a departure today during the daily NSW COVID-19 update, Premier Gladys Berejiklian invited lung specialist Dr Lucy Morgan to talk about what it is like to fall ill with COVID-19 and what symptoms to watch out for.
Dr Morgan is a Sydney lung specialist and works as a part of the team looking after patients with COVID-19 in Sydney's west.
We have published the full transcript of her media conference below, or you can watch that specific segment from the press conference at the top of the page.
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian introduced Dr Lucy Morgan, a Sydney lung specialist working at Concord and Nepean Hospitals, at today's NSW press conference.
(9News)
I know that some people are still worried about getting vaccinated, so I wanted to share some stories with you about what it's like and how it feels to fall ill with COVID-19.
LIVE UPDATES: Almost a third of people in NSW fully vaccinated
And my hope is when we can understand a little bit more about how it feels to get sick with COVID-19, we might transfer some of our anxieties about the vaccine to feeling a bit more anxious about the illness and what we can do constructively to reduce our chances of falling ill with this.
The big message from me today is get vaccinated.
It's not too late to get vaccinated.
Think about getting vaccinated today.
The Delta strain of COVID-19 is incredibly infectious and that's one of the problems for all of us.
Do you know when to call an ambulance?
(Dylan Coker)
The tiny particles of the virus get into our bodies with the tiniest of contact.
And this is why social distancing and staying at home really helps to contain the virus and contain the infection.
It also explains why once the virus has infected one member of a household, it spreads so incredibly quickly within that household.
So getting vaccinated protects you against catching that virus and it also definitely reduces the chances that if you get infected, that you get sick enough to end up in hospital.
It also reduces the chances that you will pass on that virus to other people in your household.
So vaccination avoids the risk of serious illness and definitely reduces infectivity.
Symptoms to watch out for
Once you're exposed to this virus, most of us have very, very few symptoms in the early days.
Unfortunately, you've already caught the virus and you are already passing that virus on.
The first symptoms of COVID-19 virus are very much like any other cold or flu illness.
They're often very mild, so mild as to be not really noticeable but they'll be the ordinary cold and flu symptoms - a headache, a bit of a sore throat, maybe a little bit of a cough.
Some people have muscle aches and some people have fever in those early days.
READ MORE: Queensland pauses arrivals from interstate hotspots
But some people become breathless and dizzy.
And these are the sorts of symptoms that need urgent medical assistance.
If you have COVID-19 and you feel breathless, you have trouble breathing or you are feeling dizzy, you need to call an ambulance.
An ambulance is free*, your medical care will be free and there'll be people who can care for you even if English is not your first language.
The symptoms of COVID-19 that are affecting many of the patients I've been caring for in the last few weeks include a really severe headache, not just a little bit of a headache but a really severe migraine-like headache that makes you sensitive to light, has a stiff neck and that takes more than just Panadol to relieve it.
It's really awful.
Many of my patients have a terrible cough, the sort of cough that leaves you breathless
and they can't move or speak or walk without the cough becoming really, really terrible.
Lots of patients have diarrhea, lots of patients have nausea - they just can't eat anything or drink anything and people feel so overwhelmingly fatigued, all they can do is lie on the bed.
Some of these patients become increasingly breathless.
Initially, just breathless walking quickly or making the bed
but as time goes by, they become breathless walking or even talking.
If anybody is at home with symptoms this severe, they need to call an ambulance.
Don't ring up and make a GP appointment, call an ambulance.
Because these are the sorts of symptoms and signs that tell me that the COVID-19 illness is progressing and progressing quickly.
COVID-19 testing continues across Greater Sydney.
(Louise Kennerley)
As people become increasingly breathless, the oxygen in their blood starts to drop and they need increasing levels of extra support to keep their oxygen levels up.
That might be oxygen via little nasal prongs that go into the nose but as things progress and as people get sicker, they may need a machine to do the breathing for them.
And that's the point at which someone who is in a hospital having care for COVID-19 may require intensive care therapy, the sorts of treatments that Dr Nguyen talked about on Monday.
A machine to do the breathing for you, a machine to possibly support your blood pressure and do the work of organs in your body.
So anything that we can do to reduce the severity of the illness and reduce the need into intensive care is very, very important.
And getting vaccinated is clearly something that we can do to reduce this severe illness.
One of the things that I noticed in my most recent days in the hospital was the heartbreaking stories of patients who were very, very young.
I've been looking after patients in their 20s, in their 30s and in their 40s.
Many of whom have very young children, many of whom have partners who are in hospital in other hospitals, dislocating their families.
Many of these patients have children who have needed to be admitted to other hospitals so that there's someone who can care for them safely.
All of them have extended families who have been impacted in many, many ways by the impact of the COVID-19 illness.
Not one person that I was caring for with severe respiratory illness over the last few days was fully vaccinated.
But the good news in all of this is that this does not have to be you.
COVID-19 testing continues across Greater Sydney.
(Louise Kennerley)
You could get a vaccine today and reduce your risk of getting severe respiratory illness from COVID-19 and reduce your chances of ending up in hospital.
Two doses of the COVID-19 vaccination will be your suit of armour.
It will protect you from getting sick from COVID-19, from needing admission to hospital, and from ending up in ICU.
Book your vaccine today and protect your loved ones and protect yourself.
Featured News COVID-19 rash in kids and adults Deb Balzer
Share this:
Rashes on babies and children are common.
They can happen for many reasons, including COVID-19 infection.
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, researchers have been studying the dermatologic effects of COVID-19 on kids and adults.
"By the time we grow into adulthood, our immune systems have had the opportunity to see many viral, bacterial and miscellaneous infections, and grow immunity such that if you get exposed again, you hopefully will not have a true infection," says Dr. Dawn Davis, chair of the Division of Clinical Dermatology at Mayo Clinic.
"The same is not the case for children.
They may not have seen the infection in the past, and their immune system may be learning.
With COVID, particularly because young kids cannot be immunized now, they are still having robust rashes from COVID.
"
Watch: Dr. Dawn Davis talks about COVID-19 rashes in kids and adults.
Journalists: Sound bites with Dr. Dawn Davis are in the downloads at the end of the post.
Please courtesy: "Dawn Davis, M.D. / Dermatology/ Mayo Clinic.
"
Most children with COVID-19 infection have mild symptoms, and a rash may be the only sign of infection.
"The rashes that present on children can be quite impressive, particularly if you think about the size of the child's blood vessels," says Dr. Davis.
"The rash may be more intense due to having a robust immune response or because children have smaller blood vessels relative to adults.
"
Another skin manifestation that occurred early in the pandemic in people of all ages is COVID toes, says Dr. Davis.
"You can have a vasculitis-like eruption or coagulopathy-like eruption with COVID.
The robust immune response can cause irritation of the blood vessels, circulatory issues, and clotting in the vessels.
Since this tends to be more pronounced in areas where the vessels are small, the hands and feet are more vulnerable.
We also believe factors such as gravity and mechanical activity increase the likelihood of hand and foot involvement.
"
There are many types of rashes that can erupt on the skin with COVID-19 infection.
Dr. Davis says because these rashes can mimic other viral infections or other cutaneous diseases, it can be very confusing and often very scary for patients when a rash erupts.
"Another common rash form we are seeing with COVID-19 infection is a varicelliform rash or chickenpoxlike rash.
The rash will be small round ovals on the skin with a center that shows a bit of fluid, like a bubble or small blister.
It's similar to what we call a 'dewdrop on a rose petal' seen in chickenpox.
If you develop a rash you think looks like chickenpox, and you don't believe you could have chickenpox or shingles, consider contacting your provider to have this investigated," Dr. Davis says.
Dr. Davis says patients often ask her if the rashes are contagious.
"For the typical viral exanthem, or eruptive skin rash caused by a virus, including for the COVID rashes, the rash itself is not contagious.
In fact, commonly, the rash is most exuberant or pronounced after the peak inoculation of the virus.
It is a visible signal that your immune system is responding to the infection.
"
Dr. Davis advises parents and caretakers who see a skin rash to reach out to a health care provider to find the root cause.
The good news is that with increased COVID-19 vaccination, the incidence of severe rash is decreasing, says Dr. Davis.
"We are still seeing COVID rashes in patients who have COVID infections.
The severity of the disease can mirror the severity of the rash.
The incidence of cutaneous markers for COVID, in general, is tending to decrease in the vaccinated population.
"
_____________________
Information in this post was accurate at the time of its posting.
Due to the fluid nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, scientific understanding, along with guidelines and recommendations, may have changed since the original publication date.
For the safety of our patients, staff and visitors, Mayo Clinic has strict masking policies in place.
Anyone shown without a mask was either recorded prior to COVID-19 or recorded in a nonpatient care area where social distancing and other safety protocols were followed.
For more information and all your COVID-19 coverage, go to the Mayo Clinic News Network and mayoclinic.org.
Learn more about Tracking COVID-19 and COVID-19 trends.
Related Articles
Months after catching COVID-19 in December 2021, Lavanya Visvabharathy was still testing positive on antigen tests and suffering from symptoms including headaches and intense fatigue.
So Visvabharathy, a research assistant professor of neurology at the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine who has studied Long COVID since 2020, decided to conduct an experiment on herself.
She asked her doctor to prescribe her Paxlovid, an antiviral therapy that can treat COVID-19 by inhibiting replication of the virus that causes it.
Paxlovid is meant to keep high-risk patients with acute COVID-19 from developing severe disease, but Visvabharathy thought it might have another use.
Since she was still testing positive months after getting infected, Visvabharathy had a hunch—based on her research—that pieces of that virus were still in her system.
She hoped Paxlovid could clear away those remnants of SARS-CoV-2 and ease her Long COVID symptoms.
The results of her experiment, which she published as a case report in Frontiers in Medicine in September, were mixed.
A standard five-day course of Paxlovid initially eased her symptoms, and she began testing negative.
But about a month after taking the antiviral, she started testing positive again, and her headaches came back.
Visvabharathy, who has the autoimmune condition rheumatoid arthritis, temporarily stopped taking her biologic immunosuppressant to see if that would help clear the virus from her system—but when she did, her symptoms worsened and she developed intense brain fog for the first time.
When she resumed taking her arthritis drug, the brain fog went away and her other symptoms improved.
Today, after enduring about nine months of Long COVID symptoms, Visvabharathy is finally free of them.
But did Paxlovid play a role in her recovery?
That’s the million-dollar question.
Read More: You Could Have Long COVID and Not Even Know It
Researchers don’t fully understand why some people develop long-lasting symptoms after a case of COVID-19, but one of the leading theories is that remnants of the virus linger in some people’s bodies, causing lasting issues ranging from extreme fatigue to chronic pain and neurological problems.
If that’s the case, it’s logical to think—as Visvabharathy did—that an antiviral like Paxlovid could wipe out those stubborn fragments and clear up symptoms.
There’s already some evidence that people who take Paxlovid shortly after getting infected have lower odds of developing Long COVID.
One study posted online in November, which has yet to be peer-reviewed, compared people at risk of severe COVID-19 who took Paxlovid within five days of testing positive with COVID-19 patients of similar risk profiles who did not take the drug.
Those who took Paxlovid were about 26% less likely to report Long COVID symptoms 90 days later, the researchers found.
People who survive severe cases of COVID-19 are at increased risk of developing Long COVID, so it makes sense that a drug that lessens the disease’s severity would also shrink the risk of long-term complications.
Whether it can reverse lingering symptoms among people who already have them, however, is a separate question—and one to which patients and advocates from the Long COVID community demand an answer.
More from TIME
Until recently, research on Paxlovid as a treatment for Long COVID was limited to small case studies like Visvabharathy’s.
(For the record, Visvabharathy does not recommend that other Long COVID patients follow in her footsteps by DIYing treatment; she recommends consulting a doctor first.)
Another case report, published in the journal Pathogens and Immunity in June, found that three patients reported improvements in their post-COVID symptoms after taking Paxlovid anywhere from several weeks to more than two years after their symptoms began.
The person who took Paxlovid after two years of Long COVID symptoms did so after getting reinfected and saw “substantial improvement,” according to the report.
Read More:
First Real-World Data Show That the Bivalent Booster Is Effective
Dr. Upinder Singh, a professor of infectious disease at Stanford Medicine, calls such results “titillating,” but says larger studies are needed to make any firm conclusions about Paxlovid’s role in treating Long COVID.
Singh’s research team is recruiting 200 people with moderate or severe Long COVID symptoms, some of whom will receive a placebo and some of whom will be treated with Paxlovid for 15 days—the longest amount of time the drug has been proven to be safe to take.
Both groups will then be tracked for four months to measure changes in their symptoms over time, Singh explains.
Her group has already begun enrolling patients, but they don’t have results to share yet.
A research team at Duke University will also study Paxlovid’s potential role as a Long COVID therapy through the National Institutes of Health’s RECOVER trial, a wide-ranging initiative to better understand Long COVID.
Duke’s research team aims to enroll 1,700 people and compare outcomes among those who take Paxlovid for 15 days versus a placebo.
If large studies show that people’s symptoms improve after taking Paxlovid, it will not only point to a promising treatment option, but also add support to the idea that Long COVID is caused by pieces of the virus lingering in the body, Singh says—a potentially important step on the road to understanding COVID-19’s long-term effects.
“As a physician, I want a solution to give to my patients,” Singh says.
“As a scientist, I just want an answer.”
For the eighth time in nine months I faced my GP and told in as much detail as I could recall about my bone-numbing fatigue, the griping pain in my abdomen and my irregular bowel habits.
‘It wouldn’t be fair to refer you for urgent tests,’ the doctor had told me as I sat there, then aged 29.
‘What of the 70-year-olds?’
he said.
‘They’re a higher priority — they could have bowel cancer.’
As the doors of the GP surgery slammed shut behind me, I felt a wash of shame.
In fact, my GP was so unconcerned by my symptoms, I’d begun to doubt they even existed.
Was it all down to my imagination?
It wasn’t.
A tumour was growing in my abdomen — I did indeed have bowel cancer — but it would be another six months before I got the diagnosis.
On that day I felt powerless to do anything about it.
I didn’t have the courage to challenge my GP and looking back
I realise I must have appeared young and healthy.
Around 43,000 people are diagnosed with bowel cancer in the UK every year.
While 60 per cent are over 70, more than 2,500 people under 50 are diagnosed each year and many face delays to treatment.
For the eighth time in nine months I faced my GP and told in as much detail as I could recall about my bone-numbing fatigue, the griping pain in my abdomen and my irregular bowel habits
Rather than railing at the injustice of this, there is a practical solution: a symptom diary.
It sounds simple, but by logging bodily changes, you can share concrete evidence with your doctor that something isn’t right.
A symptom diary would have given me strength to not be so easily dismissed by the doctor and to have believed in my own experiences more.
Speaking to other cancer patients through Mission Remission, the charity I founded in 2017 to support people moving forward after treatment, more than 65 per cent feel keeping a symptom diary would have sped up their diagnosis.
Symptom diaries can help diagnose other illnesses too, such as endometriosis and migraines — yet only 20 per cent keep one when needed, according to a Mission Remission survey.
As I did, people often think that turning up to a GP appointment is all you need to do to get treatment.
We often don’t prepare for these conversations or think about what information to share with doctors.
For me, a symptom diary would have highlighted how regularly I experienced fatigue and its impact on my life: I was so bone-shatteringly tired some days that I’d crumple into a heap after a day’s teaching at secondary school, unable to get up until the next morning.
It would have recorded that I was experiencing intense griping pain not now and again but most days from 3am, or that I’d go weeks without going to the loo, or the sporadic blood in my stools.
Rather than railing at the injustice of this, there is a practical solution: a symptom diary.
It sounds simple, but by logging bodily changes, you can share concrete evidence with your doctor that something isn’t right
I might not have waited 15 months for a diagnosis, by which time the cancer had become locally advanced, spreading to my abdominal wall.
I might have avoided the year of treatment: a punishing eight-hour surgery, seven months of chemotherapy and the many years of recovery afterwards.
It wasn’t until I’d endured a sigmoidoscopy (in which a thin tube with a camera on one end is used to examine the lower colon), two ultrasound scans, a CT scan and finally a colonoscopy (which examines the entire length of the colon) that I was eventually diagnosed.
It is incredible to me that I am now cancer free.
Symptom diaries are a vital tool to log bodily changes — anything from hair loss to abdominal pain, down to discoloured toe nails.
The diary logs how long you’ve experienced each symptom and what impact they’re having on your life.
They help you prepare for doctors’ appointments and to share precise information with them.
This is crucial.
On the outside, no one can see your experiences or grade your pain.
No one could see I had cancer.
During the months I spent going back and forth to the doctor with symptoms, on some days I drank my way through a bottle at wine tasting evenings.
On others, I could do a kettlebells class.
Of course, on many days I was a wreck.
Cancer patients are so passionate about sharing the benefits of symptom tracking that one campaigner, Beth Purvis, a mother of two from Essex, whose diagnosis was delayed by two-and-a-half-years, collaborated with Bowel Cancer UK to develop an online diary for those experiencing bowel changes — this can be printed out to complete and show to healthcare professionals.
Tragically, Beth passed away in June this year.
Much like myself, her GP thought it was ‘probably just a bit of IBS’ (irritable bowel syndrome, a common condition involving cramps, bloating and other bowel problems).
She was told she ‘had to try and live with the symptoms’.
It wasn’t until she went to A&E that she was eventually diagnosed with stage three bowel cancer.
She felt her cancer would have been detected sooner had she used a symptom diary.
During the months I spent going back and forth to the doctor with symptoms, on some days I drank my way through a bottle at wine tasting evenings.
On others, I could do a kettlebells class.
Of course, on many days I was a wreck
And it’s not just bowel cancer — experts say that many of us would benefit from keeping a record when we start to experience new symptoms.
Without one, reaching a diagnosis can be difficult.
As Professor Helen Stokes- Lampard, ex-chair of the Royal College of GPs, explains: ‘It can be really difficult to pinpoint the key symptoms of concern when patients first come to see us, especially when they look so similar to other, less serious conditions.
‘The last thing GPs want to do is alarm patients unnecessarily by suggesting they could have cancer, for example, so having access to something constructive like a symptom diary to record things in a standard way could help us unravel what’s going on.
Ultimately, it could save precious time in getting patients the care they need.’
Dr Jane Spurgeon, a GP in Berkshire, and a breast cancer survivor, agrees.
Looking at a pattern and timeline of people’s experiences and symptoms helps her ‘see the wood for the trees’ within lists of issues.
‘Prioritising these symptoms by severity is also crucial,’ she says.
When it comes to how long you need to keep a diary for, Dr Leila Hummerstone, a GP in Harrogate, suggests two to four weeks: ‘Of course, that depends on the circumstances.
If you’re experiencing an issue a lot over two days, you know you need to seek help sooner.
And if it’s serious, seek support straight away.’
She suggests keeping a diary for longer — for two months or more — for women trying to identify cyclical problems such as with periods (eg, endometriosis, where tissue similar to the lining of the womb grows elsewhere in the body).
The vital details to log Note, a diary is not suitable if you have acute symptoms — seek medical attention.
Track each day and time the symptom occurs.
List triggers or patterns for each symptom (e.g. does it occur after eating a type of food, changing sleep pattern or stress?)
Describe the symptom — what does it feel like?
(e.g. if it’s pain, is it sharp, achy, pulsing, radiating elsewhere?)
Describe the severity and impact the symptom has on your life.
After two-four weeks, take your diary to a doctor.
Advertisement
‘Some diagnoses can take even longer for the pattern to become clear,’ says Dr Spurgeon.
‘A 42-year-old woman came to see me with a year’s worth of symptoms, diarising what was happening with her periods and when.
‘First, her mood dipped and anxiety increased.
Her periods became heavier and more erratic, she had occasional night sweats, and from there, hot flushes.
‘The pattern suggested she was going into a slightly early menopause.
This was something she hadn’t considered at her age.’
Symptom diaries have helped Dr Spurgeon diagnose diabetes, too.
‘An overweight 59-year-old man came to see me with a symptom diary.
He’d been a gardener but had retired two years previously due to long-standing back pain.’
‘For several months he had no energy.
If he did go out, he’d come home and sit on the sofa and would almost instantly fall asleep.
‘He’d previously enjoyed an active sex life, but was experiencing erectile problems, making him feel embarrassed and frustrated.
‘A little time later, he noticed an itchy red rash in his groin which he couldn’t heal no matter how many types of cream he tried.
‘With the help of a carefully kept symptom diary, the pattern and symptoms suggested Type 2 diabetes.
Blood testing confirmed this, and we were able to commence treatment for both this and his erectile dysfunction — which can be a sign of diabetes.’
Dr Hummerstone says the important information to record is the time (when symptoms occur and how long they last for), detail (what the symptom feels like) and triggers (what happens before the symptom begins).
‘For headaches, logging triggers is so important,’ Dr Hummerstone says.
‘Things such as light changes, food, exercise, sleep, emotion or screen use.
Looking at the subtleties between people’s experiences helps to diagnose between issues like migraine or eye problems.’
Dr Hummerstone says it’s also important to describe pain.
‘Think: does it radiate from the site?
What does it feel like?
Is it pulsing?
Aching?
Sharp?’
Diaries are particularly useful for abdominal pain, when a cause is not always clear.
‘Keeping a food diary alongside your symptoms can help differentiate between irritable bowel syndrome and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD),’ says Dr Hummerstone.
‘They can cause similar symptoms of constipation and diarrhoea.
If there’s no pattern between diet and symptoms, you might start to think the person has IBD [a more serious illness involving inflammation of the bowel].
‘If it’s back pain, does it get worse when you’re lying down?
Is it on one side?
Does it happen when lifting?
Does it radiate down your legs or tummy?
Is it sharp or achy?’
‘If you experience it when lifting, I’m likely thinking it’s mechanical and caused by a slipped disc — so you’d be treated with physio and painkillers.’
Dr Hummerstone says a symptom diary actually saves time in appointments.
‘Often, people come with a list of ten concerns, but can’t tell you anything about them.’
‘By logging bodily changes, it focuses people’s minds more.
They really think about what’s happening and so it helps them communicate better — that’s so important when GP appointments are only ten minutes long.’
But as the pandemic has made people so fearful of their health, could a symptom diary fuel more health anxiety?
Dr Hummerstone says the benefits outweigh the drawbacks.
‘One of my patients experienced breast pain.
She thought it was present all the time.
But on keeping a symptom diary, she was reassured that it was linked to her cycle and was hardly there at all.’
The fact is, I’m far from alone in facing cancer diagnosis delays.
Approximately 185,000 people in this country experience them every year, even out of pandemic times, according to figures.
Symptom diaries have the power to change that — and to save lives.
GO TO mission-remission.com/symptom-diary to keep track of symptoms and body changes.
​Global surge in Omicron cases
Another mutated form of the coronavirus, known as the Omicron, has now pervaded the world and is spreading fast.
Here are the seven most common symptoms of the same that you need to look out for.
What Is Impacting Adolescent Mental Health Today?
Why are teens suffering in such high numbers right now?
Mental health experts believe that numerous factors are contributing to today’s youth mental health crisis.
The effects of social media have led to increased depression in teens, as a result of social comparison, cyberbullying, and poor body image.
Moreover, spending more time online means teens spend less time engaging in meaningful real-life connections.
In addition, national and international events and circumstances weigh heavily on adolescents.
They are inheriting a world filled with political strife, environmental concerns, economic uncertainties, and pressing social issues, such as racism and global health threats.
These problems alone might not catalyze signs of mental illness in children and teens.
However, they can certainly make existing emotional struggles and vulnerabilities worse.
How Many Teens Have a Mental Health Issue?
Teen mental health statistics reflect the devastating issues impacting youth.
CDC research released in 2022 shows that more than 4 in 10 teens report feeling “persistently sad or hopeless.”
And 1 in 5 say they have contemplated suicide.
About 15 percent of US teens suffer from major depression, and 40 percent have symptoms of anxiety.
As a result, school professionals are facing a growing demand for mental health services.
A survey of public schools found that 76 percent of faculty and staff members have expressed concerns about students’ depression, anxiety, and trauma since the start of the pandemic.
And only about half of schools are able to provide adequate mental health services to all students in need.
How Does Mental Health Affect Teenagers?
What are the effects of teen mental illness on adolescents’ everyday lives?
In short, adolescent mental health conditions affect everything about a teenager’s life.
Teenage mental health symptoms interfere with mood, daily functioning, relationships with family and peers, academic performance, and career goals.
They can also negatively impact physical health and delay developmental milestones for this stage of life.
Furthermore, if they remain untreated, these issues continue into young adulthood and beyond.
One study found that children and teenagers with a mental illness were six times more likely to have health, legal, financial, and social problems as adults.
1 in 5 of the Irish population suffers from hay fever
Preventative steps will help minimise hay fever suffering – advise pharmacists
AS hay fever seasons begins, the Irish Pharmacy Union (IPU) has issued advice on recognising the difference in symptoms between hay fever and COVID-19.
With one in five Irish people living with hay fever, it is important that people understand how to recognise the key differences; for example, a fever or chills is common with COVID-19 but isn’t seen in those suffering with hay fever.
Hay fever, also known as seasonal allergic rhinitis, is caused by pollen and spores creating an allergic reaction affecting the nose and sinuses.
While it can occur at any time of year, sufferers are particularly impacted from the early summer until autumn.
Sign up for the weekly Limerick Post newsletter
Sign Up
Ann-Marie Horan, a community pharmacist and Executive Committee member of the IPU, highlighted that sufferers need to be particularly cognisant of one particular hay fever symptom,
“As anyone who experiences hay fever will know, itchy eyes can be one of the most frustrating symptoms.
However, one of the most important things health officials are advising to protect against COVID-19 infections is to avoid touching our faces.
“This underlines the importance of staying on top of hay fever symptoms by consistently taking any required treatment.”
Hay fever can often be effectively managed with a range of treatment options, including antihistamines, decongestants, corticosteroid nasal sprays and anti-allergy eye-drops.
The key to treating hay fever is finding the treatment that works for you.
Pharmacists are highly trained health professionals and experts in medicines and can play a significant role in the management of allergies, including hay fever.
“Obviously, during the current pandemic people should only make essential journeys, and for some, including the over-70s, those with underlying health conditions, and people who have either symptoms or a diagnosis of COVID-19 (or a member of their household does), they should not leave their homes.
“However, you can still phone your pharmacist for advice, and medicine delivery options may be available for those who must stay at home.”
Ms Horan added, “With everyone on high alert for COVID-19 symptoms, it can be difficult to rationalise which symptoms could be hay fever, and which are associated with COVID-19.
The below graphic illustrating the differences is very useful.”
Ms Horan also provided some general advice on managing hay fever: “Sufferers should monitor the pollen forecast and take particular care when the count is high.
You can reduce hay fever symptoms by doing the following:
Keep doors and windows closed at home and when driving;
Apply a little Vaseline inside the nose to trap pollen and stop it being inhaled;
Wear sunglasses, preferably wraparound glasses which prevent pollen entering the eyes;
Don’t mow the grass and avoid working in the garden;
Don’t dry clothes outside if avoidable; and
Wash your hair, hands and face when you come back indoors and change your clothes to get rid of any pollen.”
Pharmacists also warn that as hay fever is a significant trigger for asthma, asthma patients should ensure they carry their inhaler at all times and use it as prescribed.
Athletic Training ECHO teaches concussion prevention, signs of symptoms
Media Contact: Mack Burke | Associate Director of Media Relations | 405-744-5540 | mack.burke_iv@okstate.edu
Oklahoma State University’s Human Performance and Nutrition Research Institute is working to tackle one of the biggest topics in sports safety today — concussions.
The recently launched Athletic Training-Sports Management ECHO kicked off its series on concussions Aug. 9 with a session on the assessment and diagnosis of concussions.
The session covered the newest research and publications on diagnosing concussions and the new standard definition of concussions along with a case presentation.
Concussions account for roughly 15% of all reported sport-related trauma at the high school level, said Dr. Aric Warren — Oklahoma State University Center for Health Sciences professor of athletic training.
Join Upcoming Sessions
However, he said the data shows this number is likely a huge underestimation due to the lack of self-reporting by student-athletes of their concussion symptoms or the lack of recognition of the injury by coaches, parents or health care professionals.
The data indicates approximately 55% of pediatric athletes who have sustained a concussion are not seen by a medical professional.
One of the largest pieces of the assessment process is how symptoms present themselves.
Some present immediately, but one must be aware they can also evolve over minutes or hours.
Undiagnosed concussions elevate the risk of future concussions and additional brain trauma while early recognition reduces the likelihood of developing persistent symptoms.
“Concussions, if underdiagnosed or mismanaged without a removal from play and a proper return to activities, can lead to prolonged recovery, serious long-term disabilities and even death,” Warren said.
“Likewise, many individuals who sustain a concussion often experience subsequent mental health concerns.
Our ECHO team is dedicated to driving awareness and improving care practices to improve recovery and outcomes in patients who sustain a concussion.”
Most Oklahoma schools do not have access to an athletic trainer or someone skilled and up-to-date with current management practices.
The family physician or school nurse is often the front line of assessment and recovery for those who have sustained head trauma.
The resources provided by OSU’s multidisciplinary team through these sessions help develop knowledge and understanding of the latest best practices in the diagnosis and care of concussions.
“If we identify concussion early, it really helps to improve the clinical outcomes, and provides also for a quicker return to activity,” said Lance Walker, HPNRI Rick and Gail Muncrief executive director.
“Best practices in management of concussions demands a transdisciplinary evidence-based approach.
This ECHO series will further empower the front-line providers on the fields, at the gym, on the mats to provide next-generation care for their athletes at risk for and dealing with this multi-dimensional challenge.”
Dr. Jamie Akin was excited when the Athletic ECHO series was announced, she wanted it to help her find her roots from when she was an athletic trainer at OSU.
“Concussions are not easy to notice for many parents and coaches since they are not physically visible.
In the rural community, many fans are sideline spectators and staff are just coaches.
If they are lucky, there are family practice or pediatric physicians in attendance,” Akin said.
“The recognition, sideline testing and monitoring are changing and this series focusing on these important steps will help greatly in the sideline management and follow-up and treatment plan for these student-athletes.”
As a pediatrician at Texoma Pediatrics, mother of four student-athletes and the wife of a coach, Akin said it is important for athletic trainers, rural physicians and nurses to attend these sessions because a proper treatment plan involves everyone in the athlete's daily routine.
“These people are responsible for following the guidelines and monitoring recovery,” Akin said.
“They help make the decisions for when the athlete is ready to return to the field, what to look for in a setback or secondary syndromes.
The more people involved, the better the recovery and health of that student-athlete.”
It’s important for clinicians, administrators and coaches to establish a safe space culture for student-athletes to feel comfortable and understand the importance of disclosing when they experience different signs and symptoms.
Educating them on what the different signs and symptoms are is just as crucial, Warren said.
“These sessions help keep local physicians and acting team physicians, athletic trainers, coaches and nurses up to date on current guidelines and management of concussions,” Akin said.
“This makes treatment, recovery and back to play smoother and safer for athletes, as long as everyone is on the same page.”
Preparation is key to the current best practices in concussion evaluation.
It is recommended to obtain sets of objective individual data prior to the start of a sport season that can be used as an accurate comparison to help diagnose the condition, Warren said.
The baseline tests should include various brain functions including cognitive function and abilities, balance, coordinated movements and reaction times.
“The way we are learning to care for and manage concussions has changed drastically in the last few years, so we want to share these new best practices with all our health care colleagues, as well as coaches, administrators, parents and the athletes themselves to better inform them of treatment strategies that are proving to be beneficial,” Warren said.
The ECHO team is focused on sharing strategies and resources to help clinicians in the development of their own preseason testing programs.
“I see many athletes in my practice and many concussion follow-up patients each year,” Akin said “My treatment recommendations will change to reflect any new or changed guidelines being used, to hopefully give maximum benefit for our athletes in the community.”
The Athletic Training-Sports Management ECHO series launched May 24 and is held the second and fourth Wednesday of each month from noon to 1 p.m.
The next session of the concussion mini-series on Aug. 23 will dive deeper into return to learn protocols and start conversations about acute care and case management.
A one-time registration is required to participate in any ECHO sessions and participants are eligible for certificates of continuing education credits after attending the ECHO sessions.
Project ECHO supplies access to specialty care for complex health conditions, particularly in rural and underserved communities where specialists are fewer in number and more difficult to access.
This is the first ECHO line focused on athletic training to reach athletic trainers and sports medicine providers at schools across the state.
A magnesium deficiency (hypomagnesemia) occurs when you are not getting enough magnesium—an essential nutrient—in your body.
If you have low magnesium levels over a long period of time, this can put you at risk for health conditions and complications.
Therefore, it is important to know what the symptoms of magnesium deficiency are so you can identify it early on.
Magnesium plays an essential role in the body—especially the heart, muscles, and kidneys.
It helps regulate nerve and muscle function, balance blood sugar levels, and assists your body with making proteins, bone, and DNA.
Prolonged hypomagnesemia can cause high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes, osteoporosis, and migraines.
Most people get enough magnesium in their regular diet.
This mineral can be found in the foods you eat, such as legumes, leafy green vegetables, seeds, whole grains, milk, or yogurt.
However, your magnesium level can be low due to various health conditions, excess alcohol consumption, or because of certain medications.
People who are most likely to have low intakes of low magnesium include men over the age of 70 and teenagers.
The recommended daily amount of magnesium varies depending on age, sex, and whether you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
The average adult needs 320–420 milligrams (mg) of magnesium per day.
Early Symptoms of Magnesium Deficiency
If you are in the early stages of magnesium deficiency, your symptoms may be mild or you may not even have any symptoms.
These include nausea, vomiting, fatigue, and muscle weakness.
Nausea and Vomiting
If you have a magnesium deficiency, you may experience nausea, vomiting, and/or a loss of appetite.
You can get more magnesium by taking magnesium supplements and adding more magnesium-rich food to your diet.
However, symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite may make it more difficult to eat or take a supplement.
Fatigue and Weakness
Having hypomagnesemia means that your body is lacking an essential nutrient that it needs.
This can make you feel tired and weak, especially in the early stages of magnesium deficiency.
Magnesium also plays a role in metabolism.
Metabolism is the chemical process that changes food into energy.
When there is less magnesium in your body, your metabolism can change, causing you to feel weak and tired.
Progressive Symptoms
Magnesium plays an important role in the function of your nerves, muscles, and heart.
It helps to transport calcium and potassium across the cell membrane.
This process is important to:
Conduct your nerve impulses
Contract your muscles
Regulate your heart rhythm
When your body is lacking enough magnesium, there isn’t enough magnesium to help carry out those roles, which can affect your nerves, muscles, and heart.
Numbness and Tingling
Magnesium helps to conduct nerve impulses.
Low levels of magnesium may cause numbness and tingling, especially in the legs and hands.
Numbness may cause you to experience reduced sensation.
This can make you more likely to injure the numb part of your body.
If you experience numbness and tingling, your healthcare provider may recommend exercises to help.
Numbness and tingling can be symptoms of more severe or chronic conditions.
If you are experiencing persistent numbness or tingling, talk to your healthcare provider so they can evaluate you and your symptoms.
Muscle Spasms
Since magnesium helps with controlling muscle contractions, low levels of the nutrient may make it more difficult for you to move your muscles.
You may experience involuntary muscle contractions and cramping.
Sometimes, people with a magnesium deficiency can also experience seizures or convulsions (violent, irregular movements).
Abnormal Heart Rhythm
Since magnesium helps to regulate heart rhythm, a lack of magnesium can lead to an abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia).
Magnesium deficiency may also lead to coronary artery spasms.
A coronary artery spasm is when the arteries of your heart tighten suddenly.
This may feel like a crushing pain in your chest.
The pain may also spread to your jaw or arm.
Late-Stage Symptoms
In late-stage magnesium deficiency
, your magnesium levels are significantly low.
You may notice any of the above symptoms as well as symptoms of low potassium and low calcium.
Low Levels of Potassium
If your magnesium levels are really low, your potassium levels may be low too.
Low levels of potassium, called hypokalemia, can result in symptoms such as:
Constipation
Fatigue
Hast or irregular heartbeat
Muscle damage
Muscle weakness
Tingling or numbness
Treatment for hypokalemia can include potassium supplements or you may receive potassium through an intravenous (IV) line.
It is important to treat underlying magnesium deficiency before you develop further complications, which may be severe.
Low Levels of Calcium
Late-stage magnesium deficiency can also cause low calcium levels, called hypocalcemia.
If the hypocalcemia is mild, you may not have any symptoms.
Severe hypocalcemia can cause symptoms such as:
Seizures
Heart failure
Vocal cord spasms (which can make it difficult to breathe)
Hypocalcemia treatment depends on how severe your symptoms are and the cause.
In this case, you should treat the underlying magnesium deficiency which will improve your calcium levels as well.
When to See a Healthcare Provider
If you are having symptoms of magnesium deficiency, you should talk to your healthcare provider.
They will test your magnesium levels and recommend treatment options that may include magnesium supplements, fluids given through an IV, and magnesium given through an IV.
Magnesium deficiency can become severe.
If your magnesium levels drop a lot you may be at risk for cardiac arrest (when your heart stops beating), respiratory failure, and even death (although this is rare).
If you experience progressive or late-stage symptoms such as abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia), seizures, and numbness or tingling, you should get emergency help right away to avoid complications.
A Quick Review
Magnesium deficiency occurs when your body doesn’t have enough magnesium.
Early symptoms of magnesium deficiency may include loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, and fatigue while progressive symptoms may include numbness, tingling, muscle contractions, and abnormal heart rhythms.
If you have a late-stage magnesium deficiency, you may also experience low potassium levels and low levels of calcium.
Seek medical care if you are having symptoms of magnesium deficiency.
If left untreated, magnesium deficiency can lead to life-threatening complications.
Talk to your healthcare provider to figure out treatment options.
A cough or sneeze in the checkout line at the grocery store may elicit fear of COVID-19, but that maskless person quietly sitting next to you on the subway could pose just as much of a threat, public health experts say.
A significant proportion of COVID-19 transmission is asymptomatic or presymptomatic -- potentially as high as 60%, according to a 2021 JAMA Network Open modeling study.
That may be even higher now, as early reports have signaled a greater percentage of asymptomatic infections from Omicron than from previous variants.
That could have a lot to do with higher baseline levels of immunity in the population when that variant hit, Helen Chu, MD, MPH, an infectious diseases physician at the University of Washington School of Medicine, told MedPage Today.
Chu said the more exposure to COVID-19 that an individual has -- either in terms of prior infection or vaccination -- the broader the immunity and the better the ability to control the virus.
In such cases, an individual is more likely to be asymptomatic or have mild symptoms, she said.
Those with diminished viral loads may be less likely to transmit the disease, but they can still infect others, she said.
And breakthrough cases can still carry high viral loads, as was observed in the Provincetown, Massachusetts outbreak in July 2021.
"Spaces that are not well ventilated, have large numbers of individuals, and places where people are speaking loudly or eating, those are the spaces that we should be most concerned about," Chu said.
Estimates of asymptomatic disease rates with COVID-19 -- the proportion who are infected but never manifest symptoms -- have ranged from about 25% to 40% throughout the pandemic, with a number of papers, including one in the Annals of Internal Medicine, coming in at about a third of cases.
There are no data yet on whether Omicron's subvariants, such as BA.2 and BA.4 and BA.5, cause more asymptomatic infections, Otto Yang, MD, an infectious diseases physician at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, told MedPage Today.
But he also noted that high levels of population immunity puts the U.S. in a "completely different situation from earlier when there weren't vaccines and few people had been infected.
"
Nonetheless, both Chu and Yang said the high rate of asymptomatic and presymptomatic transmission highlights the need for continued mitigation measures, especially to protect vulnerable populations such as children under 5 and the immunocompromised.
"We know what works, and I just find it puzzling that we aren't continuing to do the things that work when we know that there's long COVID, the under-fives are unvaccinated, and people can get repeatedly infected over time," Chu said.
"We can't get to zero COVID, but it just surprises me that so many things have stopped, and in a time in which we have very little surveillance.
"
Yang also cautioned that continued transmission brings "more opportunity for new variants to develop, and the next variant could be more deadly for all we know.
"
Just last month, the CDC reported that as of February more than half of the U.S. population has been infected with COVID-19, including 75% of children and adolescents.
About a third became newly seropositive since December 2021, when Omicron became predominant in the U.S.
CDC noted that seroprevalence can improve understanding of population-level incidence of COVID-19 because some cases are asymptomatic, not diagnosed, or not reported.
However, it stated that seropositivity for antibodies produced in response to infection should not be interpreted as protection from future infection.
There also remains a concern about long COVID following infection, even one that occurs without acute symptoms, experts said.
"Given that community transmission levels are rising in most of the U.S., it is important we continue to layer mitigation measures to prevent further spread and exposure to the virus even if you are vaccinated," said Syra Madad, DHSc, MSc, of Harvard's Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs.
"While the risk at the individual level may be low if you are not in the high-risk category, and we have more tools to manage the disease including antivirals, the risk to the overall community is still high.
"
Jennifer Henderson joined MedPage Today as an enterprise and investigative writer in Jan. 2021.
She has covered the healthcare industry in NYC, life sciences and the business of law, among other areas.
Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
The mother of a young girl diagnosed with a rare cancer has revealed the seemingly innocent early signs - from night sweats to leg pains.
Little Mila Sneddon, now six, from the Scottish town of Falkirk, became unwell in November 2019.
Her parents Lynda, 39, and Scott, 52, worried that she may be anaemic.
Catch the best deals and products hand-picked by our team at Best Picks
After the relatively mild symptoms persisted, a GP noticed her spleen was enlarged, and the little girl was sent to hospital for further tests.
Mila’s blood results confirmed the worst – the tot had leukaemia.
Mila Sneddon with her mum Lynda.
Credit: Jam Press/Omaze
“To say we were devastated is an understatement – we were completely heartbroken,” Lynda told NeedToKnow.online.
“We thought this was a death sentence until we were able to gather our thoughts and speak to the consultant.”
Specialists diagnosed Mila with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, a type of blood cancer.
She spent the next two-and-a-half years receiving treatment at Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Glasgow.
The brave girl went through numerous rounds of chemotherapy, steroid treatments, blood and platelet transfusions, lumbar punctures, and had to have a feeding tube fitted.
Mila Sneddon undergoing treatment in hospital.
Credit: Jam Press/Omaze
The situation was complicated further by COVID lockdowns, which restricted the parents’ access to their sick daughter.
A picture of Mila waving to Scott through a window, while in isolation, went viral at the time.
The image also appeared in Kate Middleton’s lockdown photography book, Hold Still.
Mila finally had the all-clear in March 2022.
Mila Sneddon having treatment at home.
Credit: Jam Press/Omaze
Mila Sneddon with her letter from the Duchess of Cambridge.
Credit: Jam Press/Omaze
Her family is now committed to raising awareness - and the warning signs for parents to heed.
“We had mixed feelings,” Lynda said.
“On one hand, we were completely elated and so proud and happy Mila had finished treatment – this was a monumental milestone for Mila and allowed her life to return to a new normal.
“For Scott and I, we still feel vulnerable, and are having to adjust to our new normal.
“It has made us more vigilant as parents and we want to share signs and symptoms with the world.”
Mila’s story gained nationwide attention after the Duchess of Cambridge sent a handwritten letter to congratulate her on the end of her treatment – a year after meeting her in May 2021.
For more engaging Lifestyle content, visit 7Life on Facebook
Please choose I'm not a medical professional.
Allergy and Immunology Anatomy Anesthesiology Cardiac/Thoracic/Vascular Surgery Cardiology Critical Care Dentistry Dermatology Diabetes and Endocrinology Emergency Medicine Epidemiology and Public Health Family Medicine Forensic Medicine Gastroenterology General Practice Genetics Geriatrics Health Policy Hematology HIV/AIDS Hospital-based Medicine
I'm not a medical professional.
Infectious Disease Integrative/Complementary Medicine Internal Medicine Internal Medicine-Pediatrics Medical Education and Simulation Medical Physics Medical Student Nephrology Neurological Surgery Neurology Nuclear Medicine Nutrition Obstetrics and Gynecology Occupational Health Oncology Ophthalmology Optometry Oral Medicine Orthopaedics Osteopathic Medicine Otolaryngology Pain Management Palliative Care Pathology Pediatrics Pediatric Surgery Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Plastic Surgery Podiatry Preventive Medicine Psychiatry Psychology Pulmonology Radiation Oncology Radiology Rheumatology Substance Use and Addiction Surgery Therapeutics Trauma Urology Miscellaneous
Cureus personal data will never be sold to third parties and will only be used to enrich the user experience and contact you in direct relation to the application.
I agree to opt in to this communication.
It wasn’t so long ago — only a week, in fact!
— that FIFA president Gianni Infantino put the onus on women to bring about equality, saying we have the power to convince men to do the right thing.
All we have to do, Infantino said, is ask.
Inane as that speech was in the moment, it looks downright foolish now after Spanish soccer federation president Luis Rubiales’ defiant defense of his lewd, predatory behavior and the sycophantic fawning by Spain coach Jorge Vilda and others that followed.
Achieve equality and respect simply by saying pretty please?
We can’t even get an arrogant misogynist to step down despite the entire world seeing him celebrate Spain’s first World Cup title by grabbing his crotch and molesting a player.
Players speak out:Spain's national team refuses to play until 'leaders resign,' Jenni Hermoso refutes Rubiales' claims
And while the many condemnations of Rubiales’ gaslighting were heartening, especially by male players and officials, it was a bit rich.
Where were these folks 11 months ago, when 15 of Spain’s top players asked to be treated with dignity and respect and the federation run by Rubiales responded by chiding the women and saying they’d only be allowed back on the team if they “accept their mistake and ask for forgiveness”?
Where has the outrage been all these years over abusive coaches and federations treating their women’s players as, at best, second-class citizens?
Appalling as Rubiales’ actions the last five days have been, they didn’t occur in a vacuum.
Nor, unfortunately, is he an outlier.
Not in society and certainly not in soccer.
Ask any woman, in any walk of life, and she can give you myriad examples of men who’ve been dismissive, abusive or both.
Men who believe they’ve actually earned their advantages rather than being the beneficiaries of a social construct that gives men primacy, and think it entitles them to claim women’s bodies, souls and accomplishments for themselves.
Rubiales just had the bad luck to get caught.
But, and this is the heart of the problem, Rubiales won’t lose his job because he groped and kissed Jenni Hermoso, Spain’s all-time leading scorer, without her consent.
Nor will he be ousted because he grabbed himself while standing next to Spain’s queen and her teenage daughter.
When – and it is when, not if – Rubiales goes, it will be because he made other men in the game uncomfortable and posed a threat to Spain’s bid for the men’s World Cup in 2030.
Sexism is so baked into the system the mistreatment of women rarely gets addressed unless it directly affects the men around us.
We protest the harm done to us and voice our complaints about the unequal treatment we receive, to no avail.
Those doors Infantino said we need to push open?
We’ve shoved them, hard, and they’ve remained locked tight.
In some ways, Rubiales did women a favor with his boorish public behavior and unhinged justification of it.
Just as abuse victims are often ignored unless there’s a photo or video of their trauma, Rubiales’ crudeness and obstinacy has swung public opinion in favor of the Spanish players and, by extension, other women in the game.
Change is coming to Spain’s federation.
There might even be recognition by Infantino and others at FIFA that it’s going to take more than patronizing speeches and nominal funding increases to cleanse this toxic climate.
Offensive and infuriating as Rubiales is, he's a reflection of a larger problem.
He'll be gone soon, but the attitudes and indifference that have put so many women in harm's way will remain.
Follow USA TODAY Sports columnist Nancy Armour on social media @nrarmour.
Locally advanced breast cancer is an advanced-stage tumor that has not spread to other body parts.
Treatment such as chemotherapy can help reduce symptoms and slow disease progression.
People with locally advanced breast cancer (LABC) could undergo various types of treatment, including chemotherapy or surgery.
The type of treatment and disease severity will affect the outlook for people with LABC.
Keep reading to learn more about LABC symptoms, treatments, and outlook.
What does locally advanced breast cancer mean?
Share on Pinterest Boogich/Getty Images LABC refers to an advanced stage of breast cancer that has only spread to local tissues.
According to an article published in Current Oncology , the current criteria for LABC also includes one or more of the following: tumors of any size that spread into the chest wall, skin, or both, with or without growth of the lymph nodes
tumors that are more than 5 centimeters (cm) with growth of the lymph nodes
presence of tumors at any stage alongside growth of local lymph nodes, such as those in the armpit and below the collarbone According to BreastCancer.org, doctors may refer to breast cancer as locally advanced when the tumor is large and also affects: the skin on the breast
underlying chest tissue
the physical appearance of the breast
the lymph nodes, causing noticeable growth
Symptoms According to an article published in the International Journal of Women’s Health Wellness, people with LABC may experience symptoms that include: a large tumor of at least 5 cm
skin ulcers
tumors within the chest
enlarged lymph nodes
damage to the breast skin or muscles
swelling or redness affecting the breast Additional symptoms for severe cases include: rapid increases in breast size
inflammation that can cause burning, aching, or tenderness in the breast
inverted nipples
Treatment LABC can be difficult to treat and requires aggressive forms of treatment.
Treatment can ease symptoms and extend a person’s life expectancy.
An article in the International Journal of Women’s Health Wellness states that treatment will vary case-by-case.
While there is currently no standard of treatment, some options can include: surgery
radiotherapy
chemotherapy Doctors are more frequently using neoadjuvant chemotherapy to treat LABC, which means chemotherapy before surgery.
A 2019 study looked at 103 people with LABC who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy, surgery, and then radiotherapy afterward.
The authors concluded that this treatment correlated with improved outlooks.
Learn more about neoadjuvant chemotherapy here.
These treatments can reduce the tumor’s size and risk of spreading.
But the cancer may return again in the future.
Outlook A 2016 study suggests that the 5-year survival of people with LABC ranges from 1–30% , with an average survival rate of 2–2.5 years.
The variation in these rates is due to differing definitions and types of LABC.
There are several factors that can affect the survival of a person with LABC.
These include: the final stage of the cancer
the extent of how locally advanced the disease is
how the disease has changed the tissue in the area According to a different study in 2014, the average survival time for people with LABC was 8.25 years .
They also stated that 59% of people survive for 5 years and 38% survive for 10 years.
The American Cancer Society (ACS) lists breast cancer survival rates for local, regional, or distant tumors.
These estimates are not specific to LABC but could be a useful comparison: 99% for breast cancer that has not spread
86% for breast cancer that spreads to local tissues or lymph nodes
28% for breast cancer that spreads to distant tissues or organs
90% across all stages
Diagnosis The only way to definitively diagnose breast cancer is through a biopsy.
There are several other tests that may help with making a diagnosis.
Doctors will review the person’s medical history, family history, and any symptoms.
They may also recommend one or more of the following: mammogram
ultrasound
MRI of the breast
Locally advanced vs. metastatic breast cancer In metastatic breast cancer, the cancerous cells have spread to other tissue or organs around the body.
Some of the most common sites include the bones, lungs, liver, and brain.
But LABC is where the tumor has not spread beyond the local breast tissue, including the soft tissue of the chest wall and local lymph nodes.
Metastatic breast cancer can spread to various areas and cause a range of symptoms, such as bone pain, shortness of breath, and severe headaches.
But LABC symptoms only affect the breast region.
The ACS suggests that women between the ages of 45–54 years get a mammogram every year.
But some people with a higher risk for breast cancer may require earlier tests, such as those with a family history of the disease.
The ACS also notes that women between the ages of 40–44 years should have the option to begin screening with a mammogram every year should they wish to.
Anyone who discovers a lump or experiences symptoms similar to those of breast cancer should talk with their doctor as soon as possible.
People undergoing treatment should also talk with their doctor about their experience and side effects.
A doctor can suggest additional medications to help with side effects.
Coping and support Receiving a diagnosis of LABC or another form of breast cancer can be difficult.
There is a wide range of resources for people with breast cancer to find emotional or financial support.
For example, CancerCare offers online resources and connections to support groups, social workers, and financial assistants through its website.
Some potential services include: financial assistance programs
emotional and practical counseling by calling 800‑813‑HOPE (4673) or emailing info@cancercare.org
case management
support groups
community outreach programs The following steps can be helpful for self-care and coping: making an effort to look and feel as good as possible
talking about emotions with friends, caregivers, or others
being specific with others about what type of support is necessary
talking about needs for physical closeness with a spouse or significant other
allowing others to provide care
discussing any concerns with their nurse, doctor, or other members of the care team
learning more about breast cancer
Share on Pinterest A study found that men and women experience different symptoms before a cardiac arrest.
Carol Yepes/Getty Images Of the more than 356,000 cardiac arrests in the United States each year, 90% are fatal.
While there are some known signs of sudden cardiac arrest, it usually occurs without warning.
Researchers from the Smidt Heart Institute at Cedars-Sinai Health System have found that half of people experiencing a sudden cardiac arrest also had a telling symptom 24 hours beforehand.
Scientists also discovered those warning symptoms are different between men and women.
More than 356,000 out-of-hospital cardiac arrests occur in the United States each year.
Of that number, about 90% cause a fatality.
Although there are some known signs and symptoms of cardiac arrest — also known as sudden cardiac arrest — most times it occurs without warning.
Now, researchers from the Smidt Heart Institute at Cedars-Sinai Health System have found that half of people experiencing a sudden cardiac arrest also had a telling symptom 24 hours beforehand.
Additionally, researchers discovered those warning symptoms are different between men and women.
This study was recently published in the journal Lancet Digital Health .
Predicting sudden cardiac arrest According to Dr. Sumeet Chugh, a cardiac electrophysiologist and director of the Center for Cardiac Arrest Prevention in the Smidt Heart Institute at Cedars-Sinai Health System and lead author of this study, it is important to have better predictors for sudden cardiac arrest.
“Even today, only 10% of Americans who suffer a sudden cardiac arrest — 360,000 per year — will survive this devastating event,” he told Medical News Today.
“Current methods of predicting and preventing sudden cardiac arrest are inadequate.
Early contact with the 911 system could improve survival, but most individuals tend to ignore their warning symptoms.”
– Dr. Chugh This is not the first study to look at new ways of predicting sudden cardiac arrest.
Previous studies have used artificial intelligence (AI) and a deep learning algorithm to help predict cardiac arrest.
What are the telling symptoms of cardiac arrest?
For this study, Dr. Chugh and his team analyzed data from two ongoing community-based studies — Prediction of Sudden Death in Multi-Ethnic Communities (PRESTO) Study in Ventura County, CA, and the Oregon Sudden Unexpected Death Study (SUDS), based in Portland, OR.
Upon analysis, researchers found that 50% of people who had a sudden cardiac arrest in the studies that was witnessed by a bystander or an emergency medical professional experienced at least one telltale symptom 24 hours beforehand.
These telltale symptoms included shortness of breath, chest pain, excessive sweating, and seizure-like activity.
Dr. Chugh said they were unsurprised by this finding: “A research study that we published in 2016 suggested that this was going to be the case.
However, since there can be a wide variety of warning symptoms often overlapping with symptoms connected with other conditions, we needed to perform the current study to understand which symptoms were most important for sudden cardiac arrest.”
For the next steps in this research, Dr. Chugh said they plan to conduct new research studies focused on how the prediction of imminent sudden cardiac arrest could be further improved by adding features, such as the patient’s clinical profile and biometric measures , to warning symptoms.
Cardiac arrest warning signs: Men vs. women The scientists also found differences in the sudden cardiac arrest warning symptoms between men and women.
Researchers found that the most prominent symptom for women 24 hours before cardiac arrest was shortness of breath.
For men, chest pain was the preeminent telltale symptom.
“There is increasing and urgent recognition of how important it is to always perform clinical research that can evaluate sex differences between conditions,” Dr. Chugh said.
“For sudden cardiac arrest, there are already well-established findings that suggest different mechanisms and underpinnings of this condition between the sexes.
For example, men are far more likely to suffer sudden cardiac arrest — two-thirds of victims are male — and women tend to present with this condition an average of 8-10 years later in age compared to men,” he noted.
“In advising patients, especially those who are known to have significant heart conditions, healthcare providers can make them aware that women with unexpected shortness of breath have a 3-fold higher risk of an imminent sudden cardiac arrest; and men with unexpected chest pain have a 2-fold increased risk,” he added.
“In these situations, it would be prudent to seek urgent care.”
By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy .
You can opt-out at any time.
Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go.
download the app
Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily.
Read preview
Measures to curb the coronavirus' spread, like mask wearing and social distancing, effectively blunted last year's flu season:
Just 155 Americans were hospitalized with the flu from October through January.
That's compared to around 8,600 during roughly the same time period a year prior.
But as Americans ditch their masks and return to normal activities, experts caution that respiratory infections could become more prevalent again.
This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers.
Become an Insider and start reading now.
"I do anticipate that in the months ahead, if people are not wearing masks — and we've started to see some of this already — that there will likely be an increase of upper respiratory infections in places that are not wearing masks," Rochelle Walensky, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said at a White House press briefing last week.
Common colds are particularly likely to spread, since they're a year-round illness (though cold cases typically spike in the spring and winter).
Advertisement
"There's no doubt the colds are coming back," Dr. Monica Gandhi, an infectious disease expert at the University of California, San Francisco, told Insider.
In some instances, colds could be easily confused with a mild COVID-19 case.
The following chart shows how COVID-19 symptoms either overlap with or diverge from symptoms commonly associated with colds, flu, and seasonal allergies:
The COVID Symptom Study — a project that tracks self-reported COVID-19 symptoms via an app — suggests that a headache and runny nose are now two leading indicators of a COVID-19 infection in the UK, especially among people who are young or partially vaccinated.
Related stories
So public-health experts are considering whether the Delta variant — which is now dominant in the UK — is causing a somewhat different set of symptoms than the original strain.
It's also possible that average COVID-19 symptoms appear milder lately because more young, healthy people (who are less likely to be vaccinated) are getting infected — or getting official diagnoses — than earlier in the pandemic.
Advertisement
For the most part, though, fully vaccinated people rarely contract COVID-19, let alone develop symptoms.
From January to April, just 0.01% of vaccinated Americans — around 10,000 out of 100 million people — got COVID-19 after they were fully immunized, according to a May CDC report.
About 27% of those infections were asymptomatic.
That means severe respiratory symptoms among vaccinated people are more likely the result of something other than COVID-19, Gandhi said.
"There are more people hospitalized for other non-COVID respiratory pathogens in the UK right now than there are for COVID-19," Gandhi added.
"That's what happens when you mass vaccinate.
"
Is it COVID-19?
Allergies?
The common cold?
COVID-19 rarely follows a neat pattern.
The CDC estimates that around 30% of cases are asymptomatic, while the remainder can range from mild to severe.
The disease can bring a variety of symptoms, the most common of which include fever, cough, loss of smell or taste, headaches, sore throat, and fatigue.
Advertisement
But vaccines could be making symptoms milder overall, so it's difficult to tell what an average case looks like now.
The COVID Symptom Study found that loss of smell was more common among those who were fully vaccinated than those who hadn't been immunized.
Meanwhile, fever was more common among unvaccinated than vaccinated people.
"Our hope is it'll get milder," Tim Spector, an epidemiologist at King's College London, recently told Insider.
"So it will just become like a cold.
"
Both colds and COVID-19 tend to develop gradually — whereas the flu and allergies have more abrupt symptoms, as the chart below shows.
Advertisement
COVID Symptom Study; CDC; Mayo Clinic; NIH; Taylor Tyson/Insider
On average, people with COVID-19 start to feel sick five days after they were infected, though symptoms can manifest anywhere from two days to two weeks post-infection.
Similarly, people with a common cold may have a sore throat for eight days, a headache for nine to 10 days, and congestion, a runny nose, or cough for more than two weeks.
Cold symptoms usually reach their peak within two to three days of infection.
People with the flu, on the other hand, typically feel sick one to four days after exposure.
Allergies tend to last longer — about two to three weeks per allergen — and won't resolve until the allergen leaves the air.
Peak allergy season lasts through July this year, so some runny noses may be attributable to pollen, not COVID-19.
But getting tested is still the only way to know for sure.
Ibuprofen is safe for the public to take during the coronavirus pandemic, regulators say, as they perform a U-turn on previously issued advice.
In March, medical guidance had urged against taking the common painkiller when treating symptoms of Covid-19 amid suggestions it could worsen the virus.
But what does the science say about ibuprofen?
Should I take ibuprofen if I have symptoms of the coronavirus?
The Government has issued updated advice, which states that patients suffering from symptoms such as fevers and headaches can take ibuprofen when “self-medicating”.
The change followed an expert review on the safety of ibuprofen carried out by the Commission on Human Medicines, the Government's medicines advisory body.
It concluded that there is insufficient evidence to show that anti-inflammatory drugs increase the risk of contracting or worsening Covid-19.
Read more: How to treat coronavirus at home
Is it possible to develop symptoms without actually having an illness?
Hypochondria was once defined that way, along with some other stipulations.
But since 2013, that definition has been broken into two different diagnoses, namely somatic symptom disorder and illness anxiety disorder.
When talking about developing symptoms without actually having an illness itself, it’s called somatic symptom disorder.
In today’s social media-saturated world, illness has found a new and quicker way to spread.
Over the course of a few months, several young women went to see a doctor in Texas with an oddly identical facial tic.
Their only connection: a video on TikTok.
The TikTok watched by each girl was meant to inform audiences about Tourette syndrome and featured this particular facial tic as a symptom of the disease — the same facial tic experienced by each of the girls.
The Wall Street Journal said this event didn’t just happen in Texas, but quickly became a global occurrence in October 2021.
The same thing can happen with other conditions, including mental illness.
Influencers can advance misinformation
Avery Holton, who has researched health constructs and social media and chairs the Department of Communication at the University of Utah, said mental illness “is very real.
These aren’t things that should be dismissed, but that should be engaged in conversation.”
Health professionals’ strong push to destigmatize the term “mental illness” is making resources more accessible online and opening space for conversations about mental health.
With the new social media platform TikTok, videos that can be shared by the public at large have joined the crusade.
“People feel some agency to share their stories: They can create reels, they can create timeline stories, they can create entirely new personas that are all about one particular mental health topic.
We’ve seen that for a long time in social media,” said Holton.
But TikTok, he said, has opened a new way to share that spreads at a rate never encountered before.
This speed lets videos become viral in a matter of hours or minutes.
With the rapidly moving reels and TikToks, mental illness is a trending topic.
However, people aren’t only sharing their stories, but sharing generalized symptoms that could be causing harm to viewers.
Jenny Howe, a Utah psychologist specializing in depression and anxiety in youth and children, said that as people have begun sharing more about mental illness online, the stigma has been reduced, but that “every technological advance comes with side effects.”
The side effect Howe referred to is the fact that untrained mental health coaches, influencers or others who have no certification — what she called “pseudo professionals” — can easily share misinformation about mental illness.
“There is absolutely zero training and people who have limited resources look at this material as being true and that can be really harmful,” she said.
Social media is creating a new challenge that says there’s a one-size-fits-all list of generic symptoms for mental illnesses.
Howe said that mental illnesses are actually extremely personalized and differ from person to person.
In truth, though, it’s not all the influencers’ fault.
The general population is prepared to listen to new voices but isn’t prepared to take their word for what it’s actually worth: a personal viewpoint, rather than a professional diagnosis.
“If you’re creating content, you have to be as transparent as you can,” said Holton.
“There’s a huge responsibility as a content producer, and there’s also a challenge for the receiver to understand what they’re looking at.”
Age of dis- and misinformation
Anyone online — creator and viewer alike — has a responsibility to stop the spread of misinformation, Holton said.
Misinformation is any false information, whether it was intended or not.
He suggested that if you’re unsure if the story is true, you should check the facts by comparing them with other reliable resources before sharing.
If you don’t want to spend the time to fact-check, it’s better not to share it at all.
We live in an age of disinformation, misinformation and propaganda, and people are very likely to encounter those online.
Holton said that human brains can become more vulnerable to misinformation when individuals are under stress, as the COVID-19 pandemic showed.
Stress makes thinking particularly susceptible to nudges and suggestions from the media people consume.
On top of that, if people see incorrect information online more than once, they are twice as likely to believe it.
Algorithms complicate this because if someone has interacted with the content before —even if it’s not correct — they are bound to see it over and over again.
The odds are stacked against the media consumer.
Related How naming emotions can help kids grow
Algorithms over-pathologize mental illness
Those who interact and show interest in symptoms of depression online will continue to see more videos on symptoms of depression.
That’s how the algorithm is designed.
It leads to a phenomenon Howe referred to as “confirmation bias.”
“Our brains are really good at spotlighting the things that we have a bias towards looking for,” said Howe.
“When we see a series of symptoms presented and we identify with a symptom, our brain is then going to work really hard to confirm that bias to be true.”
She said this happens a lot, especially with those who are diagnosed with anxiety.
“Our body and brain are not separate entities; they work together,” she said.
“So when we are looking for something to be real in our body, it often presents itself.”
Another common mistake is called “attribution error.”
An example of attribution error is wrongly attributing a symptom or everyday feeling to a mental illness, rather than a momentary occurrence.
“They start to attribute those symptoms to fundamentally wrong things in their environment, like ‘I have depression,’ rather than looking at it as ‘I’m tired because I was on my phone until 2 a.m.,’” said Howe.
Confirmation bias and attribution error both contribute to false self-diagnosis and it’s something that bothers therapists a lot.
“I validate that they have some symptoms that may make them feel like they’re struggling, but I would emphasize the fact that we are going to work together, to not minimize the symptoms, but how to manage life with anxiety as a passenger in your life, rather than something that needs to be fixed,” said Howe.
Stop self-diagnosing
Resources online including videos portraying generic mental health symptoms far outnumber high-quality resources such as sites like that of the American Psychological Association, but people should seek out those better sources.
The symptom checker at Child Mind Institute states a powerful reminder for everyone searching online for symptoms.
“This tool is not a substitute for a diagnostic evaluation by a medical or mental health professional.
If you believe your child has a psychiatric or learning disorder, please consult a professional.”
With an oversaturation of mediocre and unprofessional voices all chiming in on an important, even life-changing topic, self-diagnosing is on the rise, but mental health professionals definitely don’t recommend self-diagnosis.
Social media attempts to create a “one-size-fits-all” solution to mental illnesses.
But that’s not the reality.
Mental health professionals treat people with very different challenges and strengths that respond to and are helped by different approaches and tools.
When it comes to mental health, a professional’s evaluation matters, these experts told the Deseret News.
Addressing symptoms
None of this means we should treat mental illness as a figment of someone’s imagination.
Both Holton and Howe warned against condemning, rather than openly listening when someone voices a concern about their mental health.
“Don’t talk at them about social media.
...” said Holton.
“We have to start as parents, as brothers, as sisters, as friends and as family.
We have to give each other room to talk about what we encounter in social media spaces.”
Humans have about 40,000 automatic thoughts a day.
Our ability to take a step back and analyze what we think about is an ability that makes us uniquely human, Howe said.
The average person feels tired, hungry, happy, jumpy and scared at any given moment throughout the day because we are capable of feeling all of these emotions.
They’re all completely normal.
What social media has taken away is the ability to feel these emotions for what they are, without fear that they signal mental illness.
“The key to managing the side-effects of over-pathologizing, this attachment to mental illness that is happening on social media, is talking about it,” Howe said.
Social media shows a very small part of someone’s life.
As humans, Howe said, we need to gather the information we receive and use critical-thinking skills to respond appropriately to that stimuli.
She emphasizes that “our thoughts are not our truths,” because we get to decide how we react to those thoughts.
The next time you feel tired
and you think about that video you watched yesterday that listed the symptoms of depression, don’t let your brain make that unconscious jump.
Take a moment to think about other potential causes and then choose how to respond, she said.
When the coronavirus pandemic hit Spanish hospitals in the spring of 2020, many operating theaters had to be closed to make space for Covid-19 patients in need of intensive care.
With her operations on skin tumors cancelled, dermatologist Almudena Nuño González, from La Paz hospital in Madrid, decided to volunteer at the field hospital for coronavirus patients set up in Madrid’s Ifema convention center.
This hospital, which was quickly assembled at the end of March, treated hundreds of Covid-19 patients during the first wave of the pandemic.
The doctor could not help but see these patients through the eyes of a dermatologist, and she began to note striking symptoms, like the so-called “Covid tongue.”
The tongue of a Covid-19 patient.
Hospital Universitario La Paz
“We found changes in the tongue that until then had not been linked to Covid: the tongue is enlarged, it appears swollen, the teeth marks can be seen and it can also be depapillated, with small indentations in the back where the taste buds are flattened.
It looks like a tongue with red markings,” explains Nuño González, whose team announced the findings of the research in a press release on Tuesday.
The dermatologist and her colleagues studied 666 Covid patients who were admitted to the Ifema field hospital between April 10 and 25 in 2020.
The average age of the patient was around 56 and nearly half were of Latin American origin.
All had minor or moderate cases of pneumonia.
The study from the doctors found that more than 25% of the patients also presented changes in the oral mucosa (the mucous membrane lining the inside of the mouth) such as transient lingual papillitis (11%), which is a kind of blemish on the tongue, mouth ulcers (7%), tongue inflammation with teeth indentations (7%), burning sensation (5%) and tongue inflammation with patchy depapillation or loss of lingual papillae (4%), according to the results, which were published last September in the British Journal of Dermatology.
Nuño González explains that other factors could explain some of these symptoms, such as medications or oxygen ventilation, which dries out the mouth and could irritate the tongue.
“The depapillated tongue is 100% due to Covid, because this is not caused by any other circumstance or treatment,” she says.
“It is a finding that could help with diagnosis, like the loss of smell and taste.
They are very characteristic symptoms,” she adds.
The dermatologist Almudena Nuño González of La Paz hospital.
The dermatologists also detected alterations in the skin of a patient’s hand and feet in almost 40% of cases, in particular, peeling (25%), red or purple discolored skin (15%) and a burning sensation known as erythrodysesthesia (7%).
In total, nearly half the patients studied in Ifema had symptoms in either their skin or oral mucosa.
Many experts have been warning about these possible symptoms since the first wave of the pandemic.
In May, for example, Carmen Martín Carreras-Oresas, from the European University in Madrid, published three cases of mouth ulcers or blisters allegedly associated with Covid-19.
In July, the odontologist Milagros Díaz Rodríguez, from the same university, described another three cases of symptoms in the oral cavity linked to coronavirus, such as a burning sensation and loss of lingual papillae.
Nuño González says that these early reports were received with skepticism, as they only dealt with a few cases.
“By studying such a large number of patients, we have been able to show that these symptoms are related to Covid,” she says.
The British epidemiologist Tim Spector, from King’s College in London, also said recently that he has been receiving dozens of reports of tongue problems via the app ZOE, which is used by Covid-19 patients to describe their symptoms.
“Spector has corroborated in the general population with minor Covid-19 cases, who stayed at home, the same things that we have seen in patients admitted with pneumonia,” says Nuño González.
But there has been more research into the skin symptoms associated with the coronavirus.
Last April, the Spanish Academy of Dermatology and Venereology published a study of the most common skin manifestations of Covid-19, such as chilblain-type inflammation and blistering.
Nuño González believes that symptoms affecting the mouth went undetected at the beginning of the pandemic due to the initial chaos.
“At the end of March and in early April, there was a lot of fear of the disease.
Patients were made to wear a face mask for as much time as possible, and often their mucosas were not examined,” she explains.
English version by Melissa Kitson.
The survey also revealed that the prevalence of tuberculosis among Indians aged above 15 years is 312 cases per 1 lakh population, more than double the global average of approximately 127 cases per 1 lakh people.
The three-year survey is the first of its kind nationwide since 1955-58, and is only the second national survey aimed at determining the actual disease burden of tuberculosis in the country.
New Delhi: The ‘National TB Prevalence’ survey in India, conducted by the Union government and released Thursday on the occasion of World TB Day, has found that a vast majority (64 per cent) of the symptomatic population did not seek healthcare services between 2019 and 2021.
Delhi, with 534 cases per 1 lakh population, has the highest incidence of TB, Delhi, which reported the highest incidence of TB, followed by 484 in Rajasthan, 481 in Uttar Pradesh and 465 in Haryana.
Kerala has the lowest number with 115 per 1 lakh people.
The survey estimated the point prevalence of microbiologically confirmed pulmonary TB among persons aged 15 years and above in 20 states.
It also explored the health-seeking behaviour and estimated the prevalence of TB infection.
A total national sample size of 5,00,000 was calculated, distributed over 625 clusters with 800 population per cluster.
All eligible study participants underwent symptom screening using a standard questionnaire and chest X-ray screening.
TB, which is highly infectious, has been India’s longest standing health challenge, with the twin challenges of malnutrition and crowding creating fertile ground in the country for the spread of the disease.
The TB bacteria is known to reside in humans for long periods without causing sickness, so long as their immunity levels are high, but whenever they are in an immunocompromised state, the disease can manifest.
Also Read: This World TB Day, a look at how an Indian PPP initiative made it to WHO list of best practices
‘For every 284 cases, around a 100 are reported’
An alarming finding from the survey was that 64 per cent of the symptomatic population did not seek healthcare services.
The reasons cited by people included ignoring the symptoms (68 per cent), not recognising the symptoms as TB (18 per cent), self-treatment (12 per cent) and inability to afford to seek care (2 per cent).
Among the 36 per cent of survey participants who sought care for their symptoms, there was equal preference for government and private facilities.
The survey found that the prevalence-to-notification ratio of pulmonary TB in adults is about 2.84, which means for every 284 cases that happen in the country, only around a 100 are reported.
This despite the fact that in 2012, India made it mandatory for all cases of TB to be notified.
Doctors can be punished with jail time for not doing so, hence it is more likely that these are patients who are not currently being treated.
“(The) survey showed that among the diagnosed TB cases, 12 per cent were already on treatment and 23.3 per cent had a history of TB treatment, hence close follow-up of patients completing treatment for early detection of recurrent TB and planning of interventions for preventing recurrence of TB is needed,” the report said.
“Patients have high trust in the common facilities; it provides opportunity to strengthen quality of care in government health centres if complemented by the private sector,” it added.
‘Committed to TB eradication by 2025’
At the function in Vigyan Bhawan to mark World TB Day, where the survey report was released, dignitaries reiterated India’s commitment to achieve the target of ending TB by 2025, five years ahead of the global schedule.
Minister of State (Health) Bharti Pravin Pawar talked about how the Covid-19 experience has helped India hone its battle against TB, while Uttar Pradesh Governor Anandiben Patel urged all to adopt one TB-stricken child each to ensure they get adequate nutrition.
Science and Technology Minister Dr Jitendra Singh said genomic surveillance will be used for TB surveillance too.
He announced the launch of the ‘Dare to Erase TB’ programme, which will be based on Indian data, and the formation of a Genome Sequencing Consortium for WGS (Whole Genome Sequencing) TB surveillance.
He also highlighted efforts of the Ministry of Science & Technology in disease biology, drugs discovery and vaccine development to remove the scourge of TB from the country.
India has the world’s highest burden of drug resistant TB.
Health Minister Mansukh Mandaviya said that despite the pandemic disruptions, India would meet the 2025 deadline originally set by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in 2018.
(Edited by Gitanjali Das)
Also Read: Covid left big gap in TB reporting, Modi govt looks to fill it with special door-to-door drive
Rita Tennyson, 51, realized something wasn’t quite right with her health when she experienced a string of abnormal and mostly unexplained symptoms in her early twenties.
Among them: numbness, muscle weakness, nausea, vertigo, and facial paralysis.
At one point she was given an ear infection diagnosis—a doctor said she likely had a virus enter her ear while visiting SeaWorld on a windy day.
Over the years, Tennyson had no idea what was going on with her body, but she had a strong feeling that something really wasn’t right.
It turns out Tennyson didn’t have an ear infection; she has multiple sclerosis (M.S.), a chronic neurological condition that affects the central nervous system, which includes the brain and spinal cord.
M.S. symptoms can vary from person to person, but some of its early signs can include vision problems, numbness and tingling, arm or leg weakness, changes in balance and coordination, and sensitivity to heat.
One important thing to understand about M.S. is that it can’t be diagnosed using a single test.
Instead, an M.S. diagnosis is made through a combination of things, including a person’s medical history, neurological exam, tests like an MRI and a lumbar puncture (spinal tap), blood tests to rule out other illnesses, and a physical exam.
Tennyson’s experience isn’t exactly unique; an M.S. diagnosis can be challenging, and many M.S. symptoms overlap with those of other conditions.
This is her story, as told to health writer Beth Krietsch.
I learned I have M.S. when I was 26, but the road to an accurate diagnosis was a long one.
My symptoms first started the summer after I graduated from college, when I was working as a waitress and randomly dropped something.
I had also been experiencing a bit of numbness in my arms, so I went to the doctor and they scheduled me for nerve testing.
The results didn’t show that anything was wrong, so they basically just said to let them know if similar symptoms popped up again.
The next year I started getting really dizzy and nauseated, and I also had vertigo.
I would lie down and not be able to move.
If I got up, I would throw up.
It got so bad that I went to the E.R., where a doctor told me I must have an inner ear infection.
They flushed my ears and sent me on my way, but the relief didn’t last too long.
Soon after, I headed back to my hometown for a wedding and brought my boyfriend at the time, who is now my husband.
While there, the nausea and vomiting returned, and my mom assumed I was pregnant.
But I knew that couldn’t be the case—this was the same nausea I’d been experiencing for a while.
The next year I experienced paralysis on one side of my face.
It was so bad that I couldn’t even smile or clear my nostril on that side.
I was diagnosed with Bell’s palsy, which is a condition that causes temporary paralysis or weakness of the facial muscles, making it look like half your face is drooping.
It may sound strange, but I was actually so relieved because it meant I had a concrete diagnosis that people could actually see.
Previously so many of my “invisible” symptoms were things I could only feel.
Bell’s palsy is something other people could see with their own eyes, so, in a way, I was happy about that.
TOKYO -- Japanese drugmaker Shionogi said Monday that preliminary laboratory studies suggest its COVID-19 tablet inhibits the severity of infections from the highly transmissible omicron variant, providing optimism that the low-cost treatment may help prevent a surge in hospitalizations.
The antiviral pill for people at the early stage of infection is designed to prevent severe illness and reduce symptoms such as fever and cough.
The tablet blocks the function of an enzyme called a protease, slowing the spread of the virus.
Health department adds symptom to ‘case definition’
Shortness of breath has been added as a symptom to look out for, for detecting Covid-19.
The health department made the decision after talks with the Social Care Clinical Advisory Group.
Government says it’s in line “with European Centre of Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) guidance which was recently updated.”
The primary symptoms to be aware of are now:
If you've ever felt like your surroundings aren't real, or they're distant and distorted in some way, you might have been suffering from an episode of derealisation.
The psychological condition reportedly affects everyone at least once in their lifetime.
It is best described as a subjective episode related to a person's perception of the world around them.
That's all well and good, but what does derealisation look like, exactly?
To try and answer that question, Panoply has released a short film demonstrating how even familiar surroundings like an office or a train can be turned on their head by an episode of derealisation.
In the film, titled DERE∀LISATION (which cleverly gets its message across in the lettering), viewers are transported on an apparently never-ending, spiralling journey where the world is upturned.
Derealisation affects everyone once in their life
Like most psychological conditions, derealisation is subjective.
This prompted Panoply to come up with various surreal visual breakdowns, all of which are connected through a loose narrative path.
Panoply creative director Mark Lindner said: "A constant drifting camera move was used to emphasise the wandering mind of the viewer coupled with a very subtle dolly zoom to unsettle their perspective each time the scenes start to break down.
"The rotation of the camera was also important, as keen viewers will notice that each scene only really begins to fall apart once the composition moves past the horizontal line before resetting upon transition between scenes.
This cycle of a set scene, visual breakdown/rotate, transition/reset was used to further emphasise the coming and going wave-like nature of the experience.
"
There's order to the chaos, though.
Each scene takes place in a different environment for a reason in order to reflect separate areas of thinking.
In school, the mind is growing and wandering, while during travel, it has time to go idle, and at work, it is focused.
The ensuing episodes of derealisation mirror these mindsets and unfold accordingly.
Work becomes a pixellated mess while the commuter train erupts with all the music you might be listening to.
Instruments replace people in the train sequence
Even the home is not safe from derealisation
Mark adds: "The school corridor scene was very much a play on the blocky nature of the set.
The effect was built on a low-resolution cage geometry that we replaced with a highly detailed model afterwards.
The animation was made with fairly simple expansions of the block geometry and by blending between different poses, with each part of the scene treated slightly differently depending on what surface was being affected.
For instance, the floor becoming a staircase, the lockers multiplying, and the ceilings panels randomising.
"
Most scenes followed a similar pattern.
However, the nature scene is something of an outlier.
"The main derealisation here happens on the pond surface as these alien organic sculptures lift through the surface, almost like bubbling amber," Mark reveals.
"We built a custom solver to animate these and ran them all parallel to make it more manageable at scale.
We ended up having many moving parts in this scene, and it required careful optimisation to render it on our GPU farm as the polygon count was in the billions.
"
The office becomes suitably square
The nature scene had to be treated differently form the rest
It's not just the visuals which explore realisation either.
With Robot Soul's help, even the film's audio is unsettling.
"The idea that the overall sound should warp and distort with the narrative came up at the first meeting, and it quickly became a key element in the sound design," adds Mark.
"The transitions between each scene were also a crucial element to figure out early on because they greatly impacted how the whole project was built in the DAW.
All sound effects and musical elements are affected during the transition into the next scene and therefore didn't allow for structural irregularities.
There are a lot of groups within groups to keep track of everything.
"Another interesting process was to match the room reverberation for each scene.
It was pretty important to have a convincing representation of the acoustic environment to sell the idea of realism in both the sound effects and the score.
This was done with convolution reverbs on return tracks, which also made it possible to filter out frequencies that otherwise would overwhelm the wet signal.
"
As for the breathing part, this was added in at the last minute.
"It was a surprise to me that it worked so well because it wasn't part of the original idea, but it gives a more profound experience, leaning into the idea that it's you who is floating through time and space.
Try watching it again with this bit of knowledge in your mind."
This is how the pancreas is located next to the liver |
Photo Credit: iStock Images
Key Highlights Pancreatic cancer does not have overt signs like a lump that can be seen or felt separately from over the skin.
How does one look for the early signs of this disease that begins deep inside the body?
What do you think is a (sad and) common thing that links Steve Jobs, Aretha Franklin, Luciano Pavarotti, and Patrick Swayze?
Pancreatic cancer!
Not all of them had the shocking diagnosis of the same type, the aggressive cancer is the unfortunate health malady that crept into their busy lives.
Does pancreatic cancer have to be lethal?
No, do not conclude the gloomy picture and listen instead, to the medical experts at Johns Hopkins Medicine.
"Despite the overall poor prognosis and the fact that the disease is mostly incurable, pancreatic cancer has the potential to be curable if caught very early.
Up to 10 per cent of patients who receive an early diagnosis become disease-free after treatment," says the Johns Hopkins website.
Patients whose tumours are found before they have metastasized or become locally advanced tend to have longer survival rates, on average, because their tumours can usually be resected (surgically removed)
, it says.
Tumours of the pancreas are extremely difficult to diagnose because the organ sits deep in the abdomen and is hidden behind other organs.
There are several tests that deploy high-end technology to arrive at a diagnosis.
But to stay alert and keeping an eye on the changes in one's body will be helpful in catching the disease early - so that the patient has a better prognosis.
Though early pancreatic cancers often do not cause any signs or symptoms, there are some symptoms it shares with other illnesses that can help you like red flags.
The Johns Hopkins Medicine website states categorically: "Having one or more of the symptoms below does not mean you have pancreatic cancer.
In fact, many of these symptoms are more likely to be caused by other conditions.
Still, if you have any of these symptoms, it’s important to have them checked by a doctor so that the cause can be found and treated if needed.
"
Jaundice and related symptoms: In the early stages of pancreatic cancer, patients may notice the yellowing of the eyes and skin.
Most people with pancreatic cancer (and nearly all people with ampullary cancer) will have jaundice as one of their first symptoms.
But jaundice-like symptoms may be indicative of any other health condition as well.
Jaundice is said to set in due to the buildup of bilirubin, a dark yellow-brown substance made in the liver.
Cancers that start in the head of the pancreas are near the common bile duct.
These cancers can press on the duct and cause jaundice while they are still fairly small, which can sometimes lead to these tumours being found at an early stage.
But cancers that start in the body or tail of the pancreas don’t press on the duct until much later.
Pancreatic cancer can also reach the liver later, causing jaundice like symptoms.
Watch out for the colour of the urine.
Is it dark yellow?
As bilirubin levels in the blood increase, the urine becomes brown in colour.
Also, look if the stools look light-coloured or greasy.
Bilirubin normally helps give stools their brown colour.
If the bile duct is blocked, stools might be light-coloured or grey.
Also, if bile and pancreatic enzymes can’t get through to the intestines to help break down fats, the stools can become greasy and might float in the toilet.
Is your skin itchy and does it start to itch as well as turn yellow?
Belly or back pain:
Pain in the abdomen (belly) or back is common in pancreatic cancer.
Cancers that start in the body or tail of the pancreas can grow fairly large and start to press on other nearby organs, causing pain.
If pancreatic cancer has spread to the nerves surrounding the pancreas, it can cause back pain.
Pain in the abdomen or back is NOT always caused due to pancreatic cancer and can be indicative of some other ailment as well.
Cancer.org warns that apart from these two prominent other symptoms that accompany it or need qualified medical expert's opinion and investigation even when they appear otherwise are:
Unintended weight loss and little or no appetite should be treated as red flags.
Nausea and vomiting can appear as a symptom if cancer presses on the far end of the stomach - blocking the passage of food.
This can cause nausea, vomiting, and pain that tend to be worse after eating.
Gallbladder or liver enlargement: If cancer blocks the bile duct, bile can build up in the gallbladder, making it larger.
Sometimes a doctor can feel this (as a large lump under the right side of the ribcage) during a physical exam.
Blood clots in a large vein, often in the leg.
This is called deep vein thrombosis or DVT.
A blood clot can cut loose from the painful leg's veins and if it reaches the lungs, it can cause a dangerous condition called a pulmonary embolism or PE.
Diabetes (high blood sugar) can creep in as pancreatic cancer destroys the insulin-making cells.
Symptoms can include feeling thirsty and hungry and having to urinate often.
Disclaimer:
Tips and suggestions mentioned in the article are for general information purpose only and should not be construed as professional medical advice.
Always consult your doctor or a dietician before starting any fitness programme or making any changes to your diet.
Portland metalcore band Dying Wish have announced their sophomore album, Symptoms of Survival, due November 4 via SharpTone Records (pre-order).
“Symptoms of Survival is an eleven-part piece covering the complexity of human suffering in all forms,” says vocalist Emma Boster.
“From the honest and personal perspective of heartbreak, painful trauma, loss, rage, and regret — to the more objective perspective of war, greed, and ultimate survival.”
The album features recent single “Torn From Your Silhouette,” as well as the just-released “Watch My Promise Die.”
The new song has a great mix of melody and aggression and Emma says it’s “about the overwhelming anxiety of pre-destined failure.
When you commit everything you have to one area of your life, the idea of it falling apart looms with such heavy importance.
The song is written from the perspective of toying with that fear, allowing your weakness to overcome before you lose everything in a means outside of your control.”
Check out the song and its Anthony Altamura-directed video below.
Dying Wish currently have one upcoming US date, Sound and Fury.
They also open The Acacia Strain’s Australian tour.
Emma also guests on the lead single from the just-announced Serration album.
Tracklist
“Symptoms of Survival”
“Watch My Promise Die”
“Starved”
“Prey For Me”
“Path To Your Grave”
“Paved In Sorrow”
“Tongues of Lead”
“Kiss of Judas”
“Hell’s Final Blessing”
“Torn From Your Silhouette”
“Lost In The Fall”
New funding will enable expansion of RELIEF – a remote symptom-monitoring app – across parts of Ontario and Quebec
For patients with palliative care needs, access to care is often constrained by health system resources and a requirement to visit their clinician for assessments.
Assessments typically only occur every 4–8 weeks—a delay which can result in otherwise avoidable emergency department visits for patients.
More frequent symptom assessments would provide more timely and earlier interventions for patients by their healthcare providers should intervention be required; however, a key barrier to effective symptom management and patient comfort is the lack of real-time symptom status.
Researchers from Humber River Hospital, William Osler Health System, and the Bruyère Research Institute are tackling this issue with RELIEF—an app for the remote self-reporting of symptoms—thanks to $1.4 million in funding from Health Canada.
Led by Dr. Martin Chasen, Medical Director of Palliative Care at William Osler Health System and Clinician-Researcher at the Bruyère Research Institute, and Dr. Pete Wegier, Research Chair in Optimizing Care Through Technology at Humber River Hospital, RELIEF will allow patients to regularly report their symptoms online from anywhere while being monitored by their team of healthcare providers.
“We developed RELIEF in partnership with uCarenet Technologies Inc. as an easy method for the remote self-reporting of symptoms by patients to their healthcare providers”, says Chasen.
“In a previous pilot study, we found RELIEF to be an effective method for remote symptom reporting for patients with palliative care needs, and that RELIEF reduced visits to the emergency department for a number of patients and led to substantial healthcare cost avoidance.”
Patients report their symptoms on RELIEF daily and healthcare providers receive alerts for any sudden changes in symptom status or worrying trends.
These alerts allow for timely acute interventions or close passive monitoring, reducing patient stress through the knowledge that their healthcare provider is monitoring their symptoms.
RELIEF can be scaled up across the healthcare system, improving communication between patients and providers while also improving navigation across the continuum of care.
“Thanks to support from Health Canada, we are now able to expand RELIEF to a number of healthcare settings to study its effectiveness as a remote monitoring tool for a diverse group of Canadians”, explains Wegier.
In addition to Humber River Hospital and William Osler’s Brampton Civic Hospital, RELIEF will be implemented with healthcare partners in the North East, North West, and Champlain LHINs in Ontario, and Lakeshore General Hospital in Québec.
These sites will allow the research team to see how RELIEF can help serve a number of different populations of Canadians, including the homeless and vulnerably housed, rural and remote communities, Indigenous communities, Anglophones in Québec, and Francophones outside Québec.
In addition to Chasen and Wegier, the RELIEF team includes a variety of research scientists and clinicians, including:
Dr. Ravi Bhargava, Physician-Scientist at the Global Institute of Psychosocial, Palliative and End-of-Life Care, University of Toronto
Dr. James Downar, Chair of Palliative and End of Life Care at the Bruyère Research Institute
Dr. Sarina Isenberg, Chair of Mixed Methods Palliative Care Research at the Bruyère Research Institute
Bonnie Keating, Clinical Nurse Specialist at William Osler Health System
Saranjah Subramaniam, the RELIEF Research Project Manager at Humber River Hospital
“Digital health technologies are allowing the clinicians and healthcare professionals to deliver more personalized and proactive care”, says Bhargava.
”We will be able to assess the impact of RELIEF on important patient outcomes such as avoidance of unnecessary trips to the emergency department and associated cost savings, satisfaction with the app, engagement with the app, and connectedness to the healthcare team”, says Isenberg.
“Our evaluation of economic outcomes will enable us to determine the impact of RELIEF on the broader health care system and further bolster support to disseminate RELIEF across the province.”
“The COVID pandemic has shown us that virtual and remote care solutions are the future”, says Barb Collins, President & CEO of Humber River Hospital.
“Patients with access to RELIEF will no longer be limited in their ability to access high-quality palliative care services as a consequence of their geographic location, socioeconomic status, or healthcare needs.
Healthcare provider capacity will also increase, as a single provider will be able to monitor and address the issues of a larger number of patients.”
“Osler welcomes Health Canada’s support of RELIEF”, says Dr. Naveed Mohammad, President & CEO, William Osler Health System.
“The development of this innovative app speaks to our commitment to patient-inspired health care by ensuring that patients have convenient access to high-quality care and technology that will enable better health outcomes.
We are pleased to have played a critical role in creating the app and look forward to supporting the project team as RELIEF is implemented in other health care settings.”
Learn more about RELIEF.
Bulimia nervosa is a very common eating disorder.
This condition affects men and women alike but is more often diagnosed in women.
Studies have shown that women are around five times more likely to be affected by bulimia than men.
This disorder usually begins in adolescence, with teenage girls forming a large percentage of those affected.
Up to 10% of college-aged women are affected by bulimia.
Because of the nature of this condition, it can be very well hidden, leading to a habit that can continue into adulthood.
We’ll be examining bulimia and the symptoms of this condition.
We’ll also look into the possible effects of this eating disorder, and the treatment methods popularly recommended to manage it.
What Is Bulimia?
Bulimia is an eating disorder that involves episodes of binge eating and a purge after the food has been consumed.
Many people that participate in binge eating do not actually fill their plate with large amounts of food but rather eat a large amount of food, in a short time, and feel out of control.
Many times this is standing over the counter, getting seconds, picking here and there, etc.
After the plate is finished, the next step is usually a purge to prevent the food from getting digested and causing weight gain.
This may be achieved by inducing a round of vomiting.
Other methods of purging include abusing laxatives and diuretics, fasting, or carrying out excessive physical activity.
While the factors responsible for developing bulimia remain unclear, risk factors for this condition include childhood sexual abuse, homosexuality in men, pressure from living in a sorority house, low self-esteem, dieting, participating in sports that focus on thinness or appearance, and belonging to an image-focused industry like modeling.
Symptoms of Bulimia
When a person is suspected of having bulimia, it’s important to remember that their weight may not be the best indicator of the condition.
A person with bulimia may appear over or underweight, and can also present normal weight levels.
Instead, the following signs may be a better way to assess a person suspected of having this condition:
Eating large amounts of food
Noticeable absence right after eating
Frequently vomiting after eating
Excessive preoccupation with weight and appearance
Extreme commitment to physical fitness
Feeling guilt about eating
Mood swings
Abusing laxatives or diuretics
Swollen glands in the neck and jaw
Heartburn
Unpredictable periods in girls
Weakness
Bloodshot eyes
Sore throat
Damaged enamel from stomach acids
Bleeding gums
Russell’s sign (i.e., calluses on the knuckles from inducing vomiting)
Health Effects of Bulimia
In addition to the psychological and physical effects of bulimia, this condition could pose serious complications for well-being.
These effects target everything from dental hygiene to heart health.
They include:
Malnutrition
Distorted body image
Trauma within the mouth after inserting objects to induce vomiting
Inflammation in the throat
Nose bleeds
Cough
Cavities
Sensitivity in the teeth
Dehydration
Constipation
Tears in the stomach lining
Stomach ulcers
Swelling in the jaw from repeated retching
Damage to teeth enamel following frequent exposure to stomach acids
Bulimia also increases the risk of developing other psychological disorders like major depressive disorder.
More than 70% of people living with this condition report suffering from illnesses like anxiety, substance use, and personality disorders.
Very serious cases may worsen the chances of self-harm, suicidal ideation, and death.
This disorder may also lead to severe health conditions like a heart attack, or cardiac arrest.
Conditions Similar to Bulima
Despite having unique traits, not every person that retires to the bathroom after a meal is likely to be living with bulimia.
There are conditions that share similar symptoms with this eating disorder, some of which include:
Binge Eating Disorder
Like bulimia, people with this condition tend to eat large amounts of food within a short period of time.
However, unlike the former, binge eating comes without purging (vomiting or excessive exercise, etc.).
Both conditions however produce a similar lack of control in eating habits, and guilt after food has been eaten.
Klein-Levin Syndrome
This very rare condition is identified by its excesses.
In addition to excessive food intake, an excessive need for sleep, and a high sexual appetite are also symptoms of Klein-Levin syndrome.
This condition is more common in adolescent males, although women and older men may be diagnosed with it.
Biliary Disease
A disease caused by an obstruction in the bile ducts, this condition may also cause nausea and vomiting.
Other conditions that present symptoms similar to bulimia include irritable bowel syndrome and neurological diseases.
Treatment of Bulimia
For a person to be diagnosed with bulimia, they typically have a lack of control over the amount of food they eat during a bingeing session.
These sessions may take place repeatedly, and will usually be followed by compensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain.
Combined with a fixation on body weight and image, these behaviors must be noticeable at least once a week for three months.
As shown, this behavior is dangerous and can have life-threatening implications, this makes treatment an immediate resort once bulimia is suspected.
The primary aim of treating bulimia is to break the cycle of bingeing and purging.
Treatment is also focused on developing healthier eating habits and thinking patterns.
This may be achieved through the following.
Medication
Antidepressants are commonly recommended to manage bulimia.
This includes SSRIs such as fluoxetine and sertraline.
Fluoxetine has proven effective in reducing binge eating and vomiting after as little as four weeks of therapy.
Neuroleptics which help to manage psychosis may also be administered, as can SNRIs used to manage depression and anxiety.
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is one of the most trusted ways to manage eating disorders.
This form of therapy will help to challenge negative thinking and attitudes towards food, while teaching healthier ways to approach diet and physical maintenance.
Dialectical Behavior Therapy
Dialectical behavior therapy focuses on the triggers that encourage binge eating and the extreme preoccupation with weight gain.
DBT will not only help to recognize these triggers, but it will also help with properly managing situations that would push to unhealthy eating behaviors.
Family-Based Treatment
By including the family in the recovery process, parents and guardians will have more input in the eating habits of their children living with bulimia.
Caregivers are charged with providing those under their care their required nutritional needs.
A Word From Verywell
Bulimia has the potential to be a very dangerous disease.
Its ability to hide in plain sight makes this condition one of the most easy-to-miss eating disorders, permitting its camouflage for years at a time.
Despite how severe the symptoms of this condition can be, it is also a very treatable condition.
Anyone suspected of living with bulimia should be encouraged to seek professional help for the right measures to overcome this condition.
If you are unsure if you, or a loved one, is struggling with bulimia, or another eating disorder, speak to a professional.
"The majority of the treatment ... is aimed at relieving symptoms.
"
It started with chills on New Year's Eve.
Hoping a hot shower would help, Dr. Michael Henry stood there, freezing.
"I couldn't get the water hot enough," said Henry, 65, recalling his first symptom.
Overnight, he developed a sore throat, followed by fatigue and a cough.
A day or two later, something really scared him while taking his first deep breath of the morning.
"It felt like I was sucking through a straw," he remembered.
"This is not normal.
"
In this undated file photo, a woman sits on her couch while wearing a mask.
STOCK IMAGE/Getty Images
A home antigen test confirmed his suspicions almost immediately.
Being fully vaccinated and boosted against COVID-19 helped keep him out of the hospital, but just because his symptoms weren't bad enough for hospitalization doesn't mean his recovery was a walk in the park -- especially when it's harder to walk.
A pain medicine and rehabilitation specialist with a practice in his hometown of Sacramento, California, Henry joined the growing list of Americans dealing with the virus at home.
Millions of other vaccinated Americans have had to deal with "mild COVID" -- not sick enough to require hospital-level treatment, but not asymptomatic.
As cases climb in the U.S., focus remains on the sickest and the nation's overstretched hospitals and health care workers, but many others are suffering at home and discovering mild COVID to be a major disruptor.
In this undated file photo, a woman squeezes liquid onto a test strip while carrying out a COVID-19 rapid self test at home.
STOCK IMAGE/Getty Images
"Mild is not always so mild," said Dr. William Schaffer, a professor of medicine at Vanderbilt University and medical director of the National Foundation for Infectious Disease.
He warns that people who attempt going about their days as they normally would -- doing laundry, mowing the lawn, cooking dinner -- may risk overdoing it.
"If you're not sick enough to go to the hospital, there is a tendency to fill some of those roles," he added.
For those home with COVID-19 or those caring for loved ones at home, Dr. Jay Bhatt of Family Christian Health Center in Chicago recommends plenty of rest, fluids and over-the-counter pain relievers as directed.
"The majority of the treatment of mild to moderate COVID is aimed at relieving symptoms," added Bhatt, an internist and geriatrician.
For some people, he added, other measures that help include lying on your stomach instead of your back to improve oxygen flow while resting, taking zinc to limit replication of the virus and getting vitamin C to boost one's immune system.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in addition to measures described above, emphasizes staying in touch with one's doctor and reporting if symptoms worsen.
Some with the virus may require specific medications or IV fluids.
Elderly people or anyone with existing conditions -- diabetes, obesity, asthma, heart failure, chronic lung disease and HIV among them -- should contact their physicians immediately upon having even mild symptoms, Bhatt said.
"Those are things that then put people in the hospital," Bhatt warned.
Henry, who's continuing to recover, has three words for others looking to stay out of the hospital: "Get the vaccine.
"
Robert Rowe, M.D., M.B.A., is a preventive medicine resident at the University of North Carolina and a contributor to the ABC News Medical Unit.
Martha Kalifatidis is recovering at home after testing positive for Covid-19 last month.
On Saturday, the 33-year-old revealed in an Instagram Stories post the one lingering symptom she can't shake off, after finally getting a decent 'eight hours' of sleep.
The Married At First Sight star said she's lost her taste and wasn't able to enjoy a barbecue on Friday with her fiancé Michael Brunelli and her mother Mary Kalifatidis.
Lingering symptom: Married At First Sight star Martha Kalifatidis (pictured), 33, revealed in an Instagram Stories post on Saturday the one symptom she can't shake off after testing positive for Covid-19
Lounging across her bed and dressed casually, Martha gave fans an update on her recovery from Covid-19.
'Last night I finally got to sleep.
I had a solid eight hours of sleep and I feel so much better today,' she began.
'But I have lost my taste.
Last night we had a barbecue, Michael, Mary and I, and I couldn't taste and they were enjoying it,' Martha went on to reveal.
'They even ate a Cornetto (ice cream) for dessert.
I didn't have one obviously because I couldn't taste it.
'
Loss of taste:
Updating her fans on her recovery, the influencer said: 'I have lost my taste.
Last night we had a barbecue, (fiancé) Michael (Brunelli), (her mother) Mary and I, and I couldn't taste and they were enjoying it,' Martha revealed
Baffled: After being unable to enjoy a Cornetto ice cream, Martha then started a poll, asking her followers whether they still 'eat treats if you can't taste'
Martha then started a poll, asking her followers whether they still 'eat treats if you can't taste'.
'Do you still eat if you can't taste?
I don't get it,' she asked her fans.
Despite the loss of taste, Martha revealed that she's feeling like herself again and is 'back'.
On the mend: Despite the loss of taste, Martha revealed that she's feeling like herself again and is 'back'
New South Wales and Victoria have kicked off 2022 with record numbers of new Covid-19 cases.
NSW recorded another 22,577 cases and four deaths on Saturday as the state's huge outbreak continues to surge.
It is another daily case record, surpassing Friday's 21,151.
Both tested positive: Martha and Michael (pictured), 31, who also tested positive for Covid-19, previously spoke about their symptoms on Instagram after contracting the virus despite both being double vaccinated
Meanwhile, Victoria recorded another 7442 Covid-19 infections for the final day of 2021, starting the new year with another pandemic record.
It is a jump of more than 1500 cases on Friday's 5919 infections.
Martha and Michael, 31, who also tested positive for Covid-19 following their trip to the United States, previously spoke about their symptoms on Instagram after contracting the virus despite both being double vaccinated.
'Covid sucks.
It is so f**king s**t.
Some people are like, "It's just a cold," but it is a pretty s**t one.
It's like tonsillitis, gastro and the flu in one,' said Martha.
Not happy: 'Covid sucks.
It is so f**king s**t.
Some people are like, "It's just a cold," but it is a pretty s**t one.
It's like tonsillitis, gastro and the flu in one,' Martha previously revealed online
She added that Michael did 'projectile vomit' at the start of his symptoms, which is quite uncommon.
In a post on Instagram Stories last month, Michael revealed that he and Martha were sleeping separately because he'd been 'going to war with my sheets, pillows and doona'.
But the following day, he said he'd finally had a good night's sleep and didn't experience any 'cold sweats'.
'Still have a little bit of a sore throat, but it's getting better.
A little bit nasally, a little bit lethargic, but still feel a lot better than yesterday,' he added.
A £2million grant is to be given to the ZOE Covid-19 Symptom Study app by the UK government to support its data collection.
Launched in March 2020, the ZOE app is used by participants who regularly report on their health and symptoms and whether they have tested positive for the virus or not.
Anonymised data from the app is analysed in collaboration with King’s College London researchers to help track infections across the UK, as well as identify who is most at risk and where high-risk areas are.
Granular information about symptoms across the country and identified local outbreaks will be provided regularly to government to support decision making.
The government will not have access to the base data gathered by the app, and it is separate to the NHS Test and Trace app which was launched last week for a new trial run.
Jonathan Wolf, chief executive of ZOE, said: “We are a start-up, so we are delighted that this funding guarantees the future of the study throughout the winter.
“When we started the study with Prof Tim Spector at King’s in March, we never imagined it could become so important.
We have been blown away by the commitment of the British public to help fight Covid, by sharing the state of their health daily.
“The app is an amazing demonstration of the power of large scale science and the use of machine learning.
We have funded the app ourselves so far, and with this funding we can continue the essential work of hotspot detection and research on the long-term risks of Covid.
We are delighted that ZOE and this innovative study can play a part in keeping the UK safe.”
Disclaimer:
Digital Health News is a news service run by a team of journalists and therefore cannot answer questions about the app.
Please direct questions to the Covid symptom tracker website.
Send this page to someone via email
Shortness of breath, a fever and a dry cough.
Those were some of the symptoms first associated with COVID-19, the illness caused by the novel coronavirus.
But as more people are tested positive for the virus, medical experts have found many patients are experiencing additional symptoms, too.
Dr. Sumon Chakrabarti, a Mississauga-based infectious disease and tropical medicine physician with Trillium Health Partners, said headaches, loss of smell and taste, and chest pain are among the new symptoms of COVID-19.
READ MORE:
This is what can happen to your lungs when you have coronavirus
“Most of the cases that got people’s attention at the very beginning were the severe cases,” Chakrabarti said.
Story continues below advertisement
“Those are people with severe shortness of breath, fatigue, high fevers and a dry cough.
As the picture opened up, though, we started seeing more mild cases.”
COVID-19 patients –– especially the elderly –– are also mentioning gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting and diarrhea, he said.
Chakrabarti added that there are typical symptoms people can have, but it is different for everybody and some symptoms are more common than others.
1:48 Coronavirus outbreak: Trudeau stresses masks do more to protect others than the wearer
How long do symptoms last for?
People who have tested positive for the new coronavirus can experience symptoms for an average of six days, he said.
It’s important to note, however, that you can be contagious for a lot longer.
Patients with severe cases can be contagious for up to two weeks after being exposed to COVID-19.
Mild cases can be quite dangerous though too as people may be less inclined to take it seriously, Chakrabarti said.
Story continues below advertisement
READ MORE: Do you think you have coronavirus symptoms?
Here’s who to call first
If you have a mild case, Chakrabarti said, you can be contagious for nearly three days before you experience symptoms, and then for another eight days after you first show symptoms.
The latest health and medical news emailed to you every Sunday.
“It’s not the symptoms that they’re necessarily overlooking, it’s the fact that the symptoms they have are very mild,” Chakrabarti said.
Tweet This Click to share quote on Twitter: "It's not the symptoms that they're necessarily overlooking, it's the fact that the symptoms they have are very mild," Chakrabarti said.
“People think, ‘If I have something that’s really mild, then it’s not COVID-19’ because there’s a thought that COVID-19 is severe in everybody.”
But that’s not the case, he said.
For example, someone may have a sore throat and think it’s just allergies or dry air.
They will then come into contact with a family member or friend who may have underlying health issues, causing them to potentially catch the virus.
1:02 How to properly practise self-isolation
Another challenge with the coronavirus is that some people can be contagious without showing any symptoms, Houston-based internal medicine physician Dr. Lukasz Kwapisz, previously told Global News.
Story continues below advertisement
That’s why it is important to take public health recommendations seriously by practising physical distancing and staying indoors.
“You really want to reduce the reservoir of the virus,” Kwapisz, who is also an assistant professor at the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, said.
“Meaning, for the virus to survive, it needs to continue to be spread.
It needs to pass along to more people.”
READ MORE:
My 14-day coronavirus self-isolation period is over.
Now what?
What to do when you have symptoms
If you start having COVID-19 symptoms, you can use the COVID-19 symptom self-assessment tool.
This can help you figure out whether you should seek medical attention.
Health Canada also explains on its website that if you have symptoms, you need to isolate yourself from others as soon as possible.
The government agency then recommends you either call a health care professional or the public health authority in the province or territory where you live, and tell them your symptoms and/or travel history.
The health authority will then give advice on what you should do.
If you are instructed to self-isolate, you must do so for at least 14 days.
Story continues below advertisement
“But if you’ve developed a fever and significant shortness of breath –– to the point where you feel very uncomfortable and especially if you have health conditions like emphysema, asthma, heart conditions –– in these situations, we recommend that you go to the emergency department,” Chakrabarti said.
1:09 Who to contact if you have COVID-19 symptoms
Public Health authority hotlines to call per province or territory:
British Columbia: 811
Alberta: 811
Saskatchewan: 811
Manitoba: 1-888-315-9257
Ontario: 1-866-797-0000
Quebec: 8-1-1
New Brunswick: 811
Nova Scotia: 811
Prince Edward Island: 811
Story continues below advertisement
Newfoundland and Labrador: 811 or 1-888-709-2929
Nunavut: 867-975-5772
Yukon: 811
Northwest Territories: 811
— With files from Olivia Bowden
Questions about COVID-19?
Here are some things you need to know:
Health officials caution against all international travel.
Returning travellers are legally obligated to self-isolate for 14 days, beginning March 26, in case they develop symptoms and to prevent spreading the virus to others.
Some provinces and territories have also implemented additional recommendations or enforcement measures to ensure those returning to the area self-isolate.
Symptoms can include fever, cough and difficulty breathing — very similar to a cold or flu.
Some people can develop a more severe illness.
People most at risk of this include older adults and people with severe chronic medical conditions like heart, lung or kidney disease.
If you develop symptoms, contact public health authorities.
To prevent the virus from spreading, experts recommend frequent handwashing and coughing into your sleeve.
They also recommend minimizing contact with others, staying home as much as possible and maintaining a distance of two metres from other people if you go out.
Story continues below advertisement
For full COVID-19 coverage from Global News, click here.
–– With files from Global News’
amanda.pope@globalnews.ca
magicmine/Getty Images
First, know that liver cancer rates are increasing
Liver cancer is fairly rare, but since 1990, its rate has doubled, rising from 3.5 to 6.5 per 100,000, says Otis Brawley, MD, former chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society.
Liver cancer symptoms don’t usually show until the cancer has reached advanced stages, so regular screenings could be key to survival rates.
While screening is not recommended for people at low or average risk, screenings may be useful in people at high risk of liver cancer.
That could include people with cirrhosis (scarring due to liver damage), hepatitis B infection, or a condition called hereditary hemochromatosis, according to the American Cancer Society.
Screenings might include blood tests and ultrasounds every six months.
“If we have somebody with regular screenings and it looks like cancer, we can cure them, versus if they have an advanced disease that has spread beyond the liver,” says Ghassan Abou-Alfa, MD, medical oncologist at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.
“We prefer not to see patients with symptoms.”
Read on for four risk factors and four symptoms that could clue you into signs of liver damage.
Nearly everyone has heard of Paxlovid rebound, where COVID-19 symptoms return after taking the antiviral and then feeling better.
It even happened to President Joe Biden.
But new research shows it also happens to patients who don't take the medication.
"Our study suggests that people can experience rebound of symptoms and virus after feeling completely better for two days or more," said study author Dr. Davey Smith, head of the division of infectious diseases and global public health at the University of California, San Diego
"In fact, return of symptoms is very common, with over a third of people reporting return of symptoms even without any therapy," Smith added.
In 2020, Smith and his colleagues spent a month tracking 158 COVID-19 patients between the ages of 34 and 55.
The patients were evenly divided between men and women, and no one was seriously ill when they first enrolled in the investigation.
At the same time, about four in 10 said they also struggled with some type of health condition that put them at relatively high risk for COVID complications, such as high blood pressure or obesity.
During the four-week tracking period, 5% ended up hospitalized, though none died.
Throughout, all were monitored for the presence of 13 key COVID-19 symptoms, including coughing, fatigue, headaches, sore throats, stuffed nose, body and muscle pain, shortness of breath, fever, nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, and chills.
None of the patients received any treatment for COVID-19.
Yet during the study, nearly 70% reported complete symptom resolution, which was defined as being symptom-free for at least 48 hours.
But during tracking, the investigators discovered that 44% of those who had experienced complete symptom relief—meaning more than one-third of all the patients in the study—went on to experience a recurrence of at least one COVID-19 symptom.
Coughing, fatigue and headaches were the most commonly recurring symptoms.
The good news: About 85% of those who did experience some symptom rebound said those symptoms were mild.
Smith stressed that the issue at hand is not to be confused with long COVID, given that he and his colleagues "only looked at the 29 days after someone contracted COVID, and long COVID is beyond this.
"
Even so, the analysis suggests "that many people can expect to see waxing and waning symptoms around a month after contracting COVID," he explained.
"The main take away is that symptoms fluctuate, and that people can expect symptoms to fluctuate.
"
The report was published online Oct. 27 in JAMA Network Open.
The findings are not a cause for alarm, suggested John Donnelly, a research investigator with the department of learning health sciences at the University of Michigan, in Ann Arbor.
"Although this study focuses only on individuals who were not treated, luckily it seems as though most of the time, both among treated and non-treated individuals, the symptoms that occur on recurrence seem to be mild," Donnelly noted.
Why would some patients experience a rebound while others do not?
"I don't think it's clear at this point what exactly is driving rebound risk for treated and untreated individuals," said Donnelly, who was not involved in the study.
Still, he suggested that with COVID-19 it's more likely than not "that the course of illness is not necessarily linear, with the tandem problems of recurrence" over time.
Copyright © 2022 HealthDay.
All rights reserved.
Follow us on Image Source : FREEPIK H3N2 Influenza: Severe illness warning signs and symptoms
H3N2 Virus Influenza, a subtype of the Influenza A virus has been rapidly spreading in India, with around 90 cases and two fatalities so far.
The sickness is supposed to create a fever that lasts 3-5 days and a cough and cold that lasts up to three weeks.
The H3N2 influenza symptoms include persistent cough, headache, fever, and sinus-related symptoms.
While the condition is generally moderate, it has the potential to become severe in susceptible groups, putting one at risk of complications and even death.
Severe Symptoms of H3N2 influenza
Trouble breathing or shortness of breath might signify the development of pneumonia or other respiratory issues.
Severe or persistent vomiting: Severe or persistent vomiting can be a sign of severe H3N2 influenza.
This can lead to dehydration.
Dehydration: Dehydration can develop if a person with H3N2 influenza does not drink enough water or is suffering severe vomiting or diarrhoea.
Low blood pressure: Low blood pressure can develop if a person with severe H3N2 influenza is dehydrated or has sepsis.
Rapid breathing:
Rapid breathing can occur if a person with severe H3N2 influenza has trouble breathing or has low oxygen saturation.
Worsening of pre-existing chronic medical disorders: H3N2 influenza can aggravate pre-existing chronic medical conditions such as asthma or diabetes.
Bluish lips or face can be an indication of low oxygen levels in the blood, which can occur with serious breathing infections such as pneumonia, which can be a consequence of influenza.
Seizures or convulsions can develop as a result of fever or inflammation in the brain, which can occur with severe instances of influenza or other viral diseases.
Confusion or disorientation can arise as a result of fever or inflammation in the brain, which can occur with severe instances of influenza or other viral diseases.
Common Signs of H3N2 influenza
ORLANDO, Fla. (Ivanhoe Newswire) –
Lupus is an autoimmune disease that occurs when your body’s immune system attacks your own tissues and organs.
About 1.5 million Americans have lupus, and there are at least 16,000 new cases each year.
Here are some uncommon lupus symptoms that will make you think twice.
Award-winning singer Toni Braxton was diagnosed with lupus in 2008.
Her most persistent symptom … blood clots.
Richard Nash, MD, Physician at Colorado Blood Cancer Institute says, “Some autoimmune diseases can be mild and, and vary, can be manageable, and some can be very severe and then resistant to therapy.”
No two patients share the same exact symptoms.
In fact, there are quite a few symptoms that are lesser known.
Number one … lupus psychosis.
It is described as delusions or hallucinations.
About 12 percent of lupus patients experience it.
A few more little-known symptoms are vertigo, Raynaud’s Syndrome, and oral health problems, like gum disease.
Doctor Nash says, “Common treatments are treatments that are going to suppress the immune system so that when patients develop an autoimmune disorder, there’s activity of the immune system against that organ system.”
And despite her illness, Toni Braxton is still releasing new music.
Some other symptoms of lupus are severe headaches, nerve complications, vision loss, and weight fluctuations.
Contributors to this news report include: Adahlia Thomas, Producer; Roque Correa, Editor.
Eighteen more votes and Jim Brochin might be Baltimore County executive right now.
In 2018, the former state senator lost the Democratic primary to John “Johnny O” Olszewski Jr. by a final count of 27,820 to 27,803 (with county council member Vicki Almond not so far behind at 26,842).
Mr. Olszewski went on to win the general election over Republican Al Redmer Jr., by more than 50,000 votes.
Today, the region can be grateful that Mr. Brochin no longer holds elected office.
Speaking as a guest on a Saturday morning WBAL NewsRadio 1090 call-in program with former Baltimore Sun sports columnist Peter Schmuck, the 57-year-old insurance broker announced that he would like to see Baltimore County residents boycott Baltimore City.
Aside from commuting to and from jobs, he told listeners, he would very much like to see the Jones Falls Expressway empty.
No shopping trips.
No visits to restaurants.
No Saturdays at the museums or evenings at the theater.
At least not until there was meaningful change by leadership, he informed his host.
And what could possibly motivate such an embargo, such an economic blockade, such a near-declaration of war?
What drew Mr. Brochin’s ire was the aggressive panhandling by the young people collectively known as “squeegee kids” who wait at busy intersections with slow-changing traffic signals, such as President and Pratt streets or Mount Royal and North avenues, to offer to clean vehicle windshields for money.
Their behavior has certainly drawn complaints in the past — and in recent letters to the editor in this newspaper.
There have even been ugly confrontations between the young men and drivers, not just heated arguments, but physical altercations.
And there have even been efforts by current and past police and city officials to curb the practice and offer participants better (and safer) job opportunities.
Can they be an inconvenience?
Absolutely.
An annoyance?
Sometimes (although there are also positive incidents, like the recent example of a squeegee kid helping an accident victim, that don’t get nearly as much attention).
But there are also clear examples of overreaction by suburban commuters who see Black males of a certain age and immediately assume the worst.
You can bet there are no county politicians calling for a boycott of the Girl Scouts, the local volunteer firefighters or the various other predominantly white groups who have been known to approach stopped vehicles for donations at suburban intersections.
Of the wealth of problems facing Baltimore right now, it’s difficult to see squeegee kids as cracking the top 10, let alone being boycott material.
Are WBAL’s listeners not aware of gun violence, including the many weapons that originate from outside the city (now there’s a good item to boycott)?
Yet overreactions to Black male youth do represent a top problem — it’s a clear example of how racism continues to plague Baltimore.
In fact, callers and writers to Mr. Schmuck’s program on Saturday were only too happy to explain how they’ve already been boycotting Baltimore.
And that’s exactly how a city gets burdened with more concentrated poverty, more crime and fewer economic opportunities.
By seeing squeegee kids as the cause of Baltimore’s troubles instead of merely a symptom of the deeper social travails — some of which date back generations — suburban whites can happily wash their hands of the damage they’ve done by doing more.
What does Mr. Brochin believe his economic boycott will accomplish?
Cause police to focus on windshield wiping instead of the more serious crimes?
Reduce youth employment opportunities and turn them to criminal enterprises?
Demonstrate to these young people that the rest of the state doesn’t care about their circumstances?
It may not be his intent, but it would surely accomplish all of the above.
Again, none of that is to excuse criminal behavior.
If someone panhandling commits a crime, particularly assault, that person ought to be prosecuted.
But we would also expect suburban leaders — those who deserve public office — to look at the region as a whole and, together with Mayor Brandon Scott and others, to seek common ground and help solve difficult problems together from job training to transportation to systemic racism.
Meanwhile, we can just count our blessings that those 18 extra votes didn’t show up at the polls three years ago.
Baltimore Sun editorial writers offer opinions and analysis on news and issues relevant to readers.
They operate separately from the newsroom.
This may be infertility, but while you’ll no doubt be eager to see a positive result on the pregnancy test after a couple of months (or even one), fertility experts ask you to wait six months if you’re over 35 and a year if you’re younger than that before going to see a fertility specialist.
That’s because some 85% of couples do get preggers on their own within 12 months of starting to try actively, so jumping the gun with interventions like drugs or IVF that you may not need isn’t good for your body or your wallet.
If you’ve been on the Pill or recently had an IUD removed, hormones could take several months to return to normal, Dr. Maynard says.
If the wait time has passed and there’s still no baby bump, it’s time for a thorough exam (of both you and your partner) and maybe sperm analysis, ultrasounds, labs, laparoscopy, or other tests.
Home
Health
Asthma In Women: How It Affects Female Body Differently?
Symptoms To Preventions, All You Need To Know
Asthma In Women: How It Affects Female Body Differently?
Symptoms To Preventions, All You Need To Know
While asthma is a common respiratory disease, it does impact women differently.
Asthma In Women: How It Affects Female Body Differently?
Symptoms To Preventions, All You Need To Know
Wheezing, breathlessness, chest pain are some symptoms of chronic respiratory illness, asthma.
It is a respiratory condition that occurs due to inflammation in the airways.
There is no one but several triggers that can cause it.
While this health condition can be developed for anyone, females are often considered to be more at risk of the disease.
Asthma is very common disease in women it affects them differently.
There can be several triggers for asthma.
Specially in a time when cities are becoming gas chambers due to pollution, children have started to develope such conditions at an early stage.
According to a study in National Library of Medicine, “Gender differences in asthma incidence, prevalence and severity have been reported worldwide.
After puberty, asthma becomes more prevalent and severe in women, and is highest in women with early menarche or with multiple gestations, suggesting a role for sex hormones in asthma genesis.”
Asthma Affects Women Differently
There can be several triggers that cause asthma, however, hormonal changes in women is one of the major cause that lead to a respiratory disorder.
While cocking and cleaning women get exposed to regular triggers like smoke, dust and strong smells in food.
Cooking on chulha also makes them more prone to asthma.
Apart from it, continuous exposure to irritants also is a major trigger.
In rural setup, females are majorly held responsible for looking after children, household and also indulge in physical labour like working as house help, cleaning ladies etc.
Thus too much physical activity does have certain effect.
According to a report by the Indian Express, Dr. Vrushali Khadke said that, “For example, during menstruation, a drop in estrogen levels can trigger inflammation and asthma flare-ups.
Nearly 20 to 25 per cent of all women with asthma experience exacerbated symptoms like tightness of chest, wheezing and shortness of breath, just before their monthly cycle begins.
Pregnancy, on the other hand, can lead to increased levels of progesterone, which can cause airway constriction and shortness of breath.
Thirty per cent of women with asthma experience worsening symptoms during pregnancy.
However, post-menopause incidence reduces the risk of developing asthma.”
Genetically and hormonally till menopause have a better cover against bronchial a zsthma but post menopause the hormonal changes make them more vulnerable.
Speaking with india.com Dr. Ravi Dosi, Consultant, Pulmonary medicine, said that if we look at our routine OPD practice we realize that females suffer more severely from Asthma as compared to male counterparts in the same age bracket.
Signs, Symptoms and Precautions
The early diagnosis in recognition of asthma is most important in order to keep it under control.
Once Asthma is diagnosed in the patient the major precaution that we have to identify is what are the causes also known as triggers and if they are avoidable or not.
Females with asthma and allergy cases generally have symptoms in the form of:
Running nose
Sneezing
Headache
Breathlessness
Wheezing while climbing stairs
Sputum in cough
Weather changes can cause weakness
Prevention for Asthma
While few things might be inevitable, we must do our best to try and lower the risk of developing any health issues.
Here are some generic lifestyles that we can make:
Consume a healthy diet
Identify the triggers and try to avoid them
Reduce exposure to occupational and environmental irritant, allergens
Monitor your breathing
Take proper medication
(-Inputs from Dr. Ravi Dosi, Consultant, Pulmonary medicine, Kokilaben Dhirubhai Ambani Hospital)
For breaking news and live news updates, like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
Read more on Latest Health News on India.com.
Chest pain after COVID-19 is among the concerning symptoms cardiologists are seeing, even as hospitalizations from the latest surge of COVID-19 cases recede.
Many recover initially from COVID-19 only to suffer weeks later from sometimes confounding symptoms that can affect all parts of the body.
These individuals are the victims of long COVID, defined by the CDC as conditions patients experience four or more weeks after recovering from a COVID-19 infection.
Long COVID patients, or “long haulers,” battle symptoms that include chest pain, chronic fatigue, brain fog, shortness of breath, nerve problems, anxiety and depression, joint and muscle pain and more.
They therefore benefit from multidisciplinary care, which is available at the UCHealth Post-COVID Clinic.
UCHealth Today spoke with Dr. Natasha Altman, an advanced heart failure and transplant cardiology specialist with the Heart Failure Clinic at UCHealth University of Colorado Hospital on the Anschutz Medical Campus.
Altman provides heart care for long COVID patients at the Post-COVID Clinic.
What are the most common symptoms you see in long COVID patients?
“The most common are chest pain, abnormally high heart rates, heart palpitations, shortness of breath and difficulty doing the same exercises people were doing prior to having COVID,” Altman said.
Do you have a sense of the prevalence of long COVID?
“It is hard to estimate an overall prevalence in the era of the omicron variant,” Altman said.
She said she sees five to six patients a week with a variety of post-COVID cardiac symptoms.
Does everyone with cardiac-related post-COVID issues have long COVID?
No.
“COVID in patients with underlying heart disease is a known risk factor for complications,” Altman said.
“These patients are at a higher risk of hospitalization, persistent illness and potentially death.”
Altman added that people with a preexisting heart condition – heart failure and coronary artery disease, for example – generally have “a rough course” of recovery from COVID-19 and can be at greater risk for lung disease, blood clots and heart attacks.
Given that prospect, it’s vital for all people with any condition that heightens the high risk of complications from COVID to get vaccinated, Altman said.
Are you seeing patients who had mild to moderate COVID symptoms but show signs of long COVID?
Yes.
“I have seen patients with very mild symptoms who weeks later started to develop chest pain, heart palpitations and difficulty breathing with exertion,” Altman said.
“Some of these are people in their 20s and 30s who were perfectly healthy before COVID – mountain bikers and hikers who are now completely debilitated.
These are the patients who can really benefit from seeing us in the multidisciplinary clinic.
We can help to determine how much of the problem is heart- and lung-related, how much is deconditioning, how much is related to other potential issues.
We try to piece it all together.”
Altman emphasized that younger people who are healthy are at lower risk of developing severe complications after COVID.
“But we don’t how many of those folks and which ones are going to develop long-term symptoms,” she said.
Vaccination, while not 100% effective, offers further protection against those uncertainties.
Simply put, “Trying to avoid infection overall is preferable,” Altman said.
What has been the biggest challenge in helping patients with long COVID?
“It’s younger people who are completely exhausted after a minimal amount of exertion,” Altman said.
A simple walk or five minutes on an exercise bike can leave people fatigued, short of breath and complaining of chest pain.
“They are just completely wiped out, and that takes a long time to get better,” Altman added.
There are no shortcuts to helping patients with the problem.
“We first make sure that we rule out any other underlying causes of their symptoms,” Altman said.
“For example, we want to ensure that they don’t have inflammation of their heart, that their lungs are working well, and that they have no heart rhythm problems.”
If patients clear those tests, a difficult path sometimes lies before them.
“They may have a persistent disability that takes a long time to get through,” Altman said.
“I do have a number of patients who continue to struggle with that.
It’s an uphill battle, made easier by working with a group of focused specialists like what we have assembled in the Post-COVID clinic at the University of Colorado Hospital.”
How can you help these chronically fatigued long COVID patients?
The multidisciplinary approach of the UCHealth Post-COVID Clinic is key to addressing chronic fatigue, as well as the array of other long COVID health issues, Altman said.
For chronically fatigued patients, she works with specialists from physical therapy, physical medicine and rehabilitation, pulmonary rehabilitation and others, depending on each patient’s specific symptoms and complaints.
“The problem isn’t cardiac-specific,” she said.
“It’s kind of a whole-body problem.”
A “consensus guidance statement” co-authored by Dr. William Niehaus, assistant professor of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation at CU (and a provider in the UCHealth Post-COVID Clinic) underscores her point.
Niehaus and his colleagues maintain that treating fatigue in long COVID requires addressing problems like inadequate sleep and nutrition; infectious and autoimmune diseases; and heart, lung and nerve disorders.
They also recommend developing strategies to help patients return to activity gradually; conserve their energy; eat healthy foods; stay hydrated; and follow, if necessary, a regimen of medications and herbal and vitamin supplements.
Can long COVID patients help themselves through chronic fatigue?
Yes.
Altman recommends staying active and exercising – but within boundaries.
A good way to start is with recumbent biking and rowing, which helps to exercise the heart while reducing strain on the joints and muscles.
“Start out with very low-intensity exercise and resistance,” Altman said.
“If you’re wiped out after five minutes, try two and slowly increase the time and resistance that you can tolerate.”
She added that it’s a mistake for chronically fatigued patients to believe that they can simply push their way through it.
“People tend to exercise hard, then crash and have a huge setback,” Altman said.
“Know your limitations and recognize those warning signs of when you are going to crash.”
It’s also important to stay hydrated with three to four liters a day of fluid (unless you have heart failure) while avoiding alcohol and caffeine and modestly increasing salt intake (unless you have high blood pressure).
What is myocarditis and is it connected with long COVID?
Myocarditis is inflammation of the heart muscle, or myocardium.
It has many causes, but one is infection from viruses, including influenza, adenovirus (those responsible for colds, bronchitis, pneumonia and other illnesses) and SARS-CoV-2, which causes COVID-19.
In severe cases, myocarditis can lead to heart failure and irregular heart rhythms.
Altman noted that the heart has receptors — ACE2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) – to which the SARS-CoV-2 protein binds.
“That may be an easier way for the virus to get into the heart muscle,” Altman said.
However, Altman said it is “rare” for COVID-19 patients to develop myocarditis, a conclusion supported by CDC research.
It’s even rarer to see myocarditis in patients post-COVID, although it occurs occasionally.
“We aren’t entirely sure why it happens,” she said.
Altman is also the clinical principal investigator of a study examining the effects of the SARS-COV-2 virus on the hearts of critically ill COVID-19 patients.
She added that she has done a number of cardiac MRIs, the “gold standard” for diagnosing myocarditis and has found the instances of it “rather low” in COVID-19 patients.
I also see something called POTS associated with long COVID.
What is that?
POTS is short for postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, a mouthful for a condition that causes a variety of symptoms – changes in blood pressure and heart rate, lightheadedness, brain fog and fainting, among others – when a person stands up after lying down.
The symptoms of POTS are similar to those of orthostatic intolerance, the difference being that the key symptom of POTS is a rapidly increased heart rate when a person stands up.
Orthostatic intolerance generally causes blood pressure to drop during the transition to standing.
Altman said some long COVID patients do not have POTS “per se,” but do suffer from some of its symptoms, particularly an elevated heart rate when they stand up.
More broadly, she said COVID-19 seems sometimes to disrupt the autonomic nervous system – the one that governs bodily functions like heart rate and blood pressure.
Are there ways to help with POTS symptoms?
Yes.
It’s important that patients get plenty of fluids to increase their blood volume, Altman said, and avoid alcohol and caffeine, which dehydrate.
These steps help to prevent large shifts in blood when a person stands up after lying down.
Patients can help themselves with low-intensity, recumbent exercise, gradually increased over time.
Altman said she also recommends compression garments, which can help to redistribute blood flow and lower heart rate.
What are some of the lessons learned about diagnosing and treating long COVID?
One major lesson: long COVID is consistently inconsistent.
“It’s not predictable who is going to have long COVID.
We’ve seen patients across the board,” Altman said.
“We’ve also seen very different symptoms and presentations and learned to develop patient-specific treatment regimens.”
It follows that she and her colleagues no longer see long haul COVID as a single entity, Altman added.
A patient with chronic fatigue will need different services than one with, say, abnormal heart rhythms.
That highlights again the benefits of a multidisciplinary clinic and approach to care.
“We think about patients in the big picture,” Altman said.
“We have gotten good at sorting out each patient’s symptoms and then developing a personalized plan based on our findings.”
Is more research on long COVID and cardiac-related symptoms, such as chest pain after COVID, underway?
Yes.
An important one in which Altman is involved is a large National Institutes of Health study of long COVID called RECOVER.
Among other efforts, RECOVER aims to recruit 17,000 patients across the United States to study not only long COVID patients but also those who recovered without long COVID and healthy controls.
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus is part of a consortium with the University of Utah, Intermountain Healthcare, University of New Mexico and Denver Health and Hospitals involved in the initiative.
Finally, when should I be concerned about post-COVID symptoms, such as chest pain?
An increase in heart rate in and of itself is not “horribly concerning,” Altman said.
“But if you have any persistent problems like chest pain, shortness of breath, or feeling faint, those need to be checked out.”
Weekly electronic symptom-tracking surveys improved physical function, symptom control and health-related quality of life among cancer patients, according to a study published in JAMA.
In a randomized trial that included 52 practices and 1,191 patients receiving treatment for metastatic cancer, researchers found statistically significant improvements in secondary outcomes like function and quality of life after a three month follow-up compared with usual care.
Results on the primary outcome, overall survival, weren't yet available.
In the survey group, patients were asked to complete a weekly survey online or through an automated phone system for one year.
They were asked about symptoms like pain, nausea, vomiting, constipation, diarrhea, dyspnea, insomnia and depression.
The survey also included questions about eating and drinking, falls, financial challenges and their ability to care for themselves and do daily tasks.
If a patient reported severe or worsening symptoms, an alert was triggered for the care team.
"In this report of secondary outcomes from a randomized clinical trial of adults receiving cancer treatment, use of weekly electronic PRO surveys to monitor symptoms, compared with usual care, resulted in statistically significant improvements in physical function, symptom control and HRQOL at 3 months, with mean improvements of approximately 2.5 points on a 0- to 100-point scale.
These findings should be interpreted provisionally pending results of the primary outcome of overall survival," the study's authors wrote.
WHY IT MATTERS
Researchers noted that identifying symptoms early can prevent them from getting worse and causing complications.
They also found that most patients were able to complete the surveys, even though they were sick and some had limited experience with technology.
However, they also found the effect was smaller than in previous single-center trials, and it diminished over time.
Participants in the intervention group were also more likely to drop out, which could mean they found the survey burdensome.
Other limitations include the missing primary outcome, limited language options for surveys, a lack of blinding and no control for the additional attention the survey group may have received from providers.
Though the study demonstrates the potential benefits of symptom tracking for cancer patients, utilizing the system could still be challenging for practices.
"Implementation requires technology, patient engagement, staff effort and modification of information flow.
A prior analysis of user feedback from this trial found high levels of enthusiasm from patients and clinicians.
However, nurses reported that alerts could be burdensome unless there is dedicated time to address the alerts," researchers wrote.
"Despite cost savings associated with PRO monitoring for insurance companies, currently funding is not available to sustain additional costs to clinics of technology and staffing in the U.S."
THE LARGER TREND
There are a number of cancer-focused digital health companies on the market.
For instance, Finnish-born Kaiku Health recently partnered with pharma and diagnostics giant Roche to offer Kaiku's tools for cancer symptom management and support to clinics and patients.
Meanwhile, cancer-care-coordination platform Jasper Health and home care and remote monitoring company Reimagine Care both recently raised $25 million in funding.
Share on Pinterest Irritable bowel syndrome, commonly referred to as IBS, is a condition in which multiple symptoms can appear together, creating recurring pain in the abdominal area and even causing bowel dysfunction.
Common side effects can include diarrhea, constipation, or both scenarios.
And often, those symptoms can persist even without creating further damage to the digestive tract.
While IBS is an uncomfortable condition, it’s not directly linked with more serious diseases like cancer.
Often it can be managed through medical interventions, dietary shifts, lifestyle changes, stress management, or a combination thereof.
Keep reading to learn more of what we know about how IBS functions in older populations.
What causes IBS in the elderly?
To date, there still isn’t a definitive answer regarding a single cause of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) specifically in older populations.
Several preliminary studies have offered a few working theories.
A potential link between aging and IBS Brain atrophy is a normal part of brain growth.
The brain contains both gray and white matter, with gray matter volume (GMV) decreasing significantly beginning in our 20s and continuing throughout our 70s.
A 2018 study found a link between abnormalities in gray matter density observed through MRIs and abnormal pain-related activation in IBS patients.
Specifically, the researchers found a connection — through the review of participant MRIs in their study as well as MRIs from other chronic pain studies — between decreased gray matter density and patients experiencing chronic pain when compared to the control participants.
Not only did this impact those diagnosed with IBS, but also individuals with vulvodynia (or pain in the vulva).
By further reviewing the 2018 study participant group , researchers also found abnormalities in the white matter volume (WMV).
However, confirming a link between WMV and IBS still needs further investigation.
More importantly, researchers noted that it’s unclear whether a decline in GMV can be considered a risk factor for IBS or a result of it.
Common risk factors for IBS Regardless of age, multiple scenarios can contribute to this condition.
According to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), people with IBS tend to have one or more of these common underlying factors: digestive tract bacterial infections
bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine
genetic predisposition to developing IBS
food sensitivities or intolerances that can create digestive upset
stressful early life events like physical or sexual abuse
mental disorders such as anxiety, depression, and even somatic symptom disorder Is irritable bowel syndrome common in the elderly?
Once thought to be a condition found solely in younger populations, experts now know that IBS can be present in the elderly.
However, the rate of diagnosis for the elderly is similar to other age groups.
According to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) , roughly 10% to 20% of older adults experience symptoms consistent with an IBS diagnosis.
Was this helpful?
What are the symptoms of IBS in older adults?
Although the cause of IBS in older adults isn’t well known, the symptoms tend to be the same in younger adults.
The most common symptoms include abdominal pain that’s usually related to bowel movements, diarrhea, and constipation.
However other symptoms can include: feeling like bowel movements aren’t finished
whitish mucus in stool
bloating
nausea
How do you treat IBS in the elderly?
There are multiple approaches to treating IBS — across all demographics.
For most people, a multifaceted strategy is needed to control IBS symptoms and alleviate discomfort.
This can include dietary changes, stress management, lifestyle changes, and in some cases, prescription medicine.
While most treatment methods are similar for younger populations, treatment for older adults will usually focus more on lifestyle and dietary changes, as well as incorporating psychological therapy and support.
Medications to treat IBS Of all the methods for treating IBS, prescribing medications is usually cautioned against for older adults .
This is because there’s often a heightened risk of side effects or even interactions with other prescribed drugs.
However, over-the-counter (OTC) medications to manage symptoms such as loperamide (Imodium) or even laxatives to soften stool might be recommended.
Likewise, your doctor might recommend probiotics as well as coated peppermint oil capsules .
If your doctor does prescribe medication — such as Bentyl — for your IBS symptoms, follow their instructions carefully.
Talk with your doctor about any other medications, vitamins, or fiber supplements that you’re taking.
They’ll be able to design a schedule that avoids medication interactions.
Stress reduction There’s proof that IBS has a strong brain-gut connection .
This means that situations that impact your mood can directly manifest throughout your body — but specifically your digestive system.
And for many people with IBS, flare-ups can often be linked to specific high-stress situations.
Learning to better manage stress through cognitive therapy or even mindfulness techniques can aid in reducing the body’s reaction to those experiences, and limiting IBS symptoms.
Talk with your doctor or therapist about the best ways to help manage your stress and reduce your IBS symptoms.
How can we stop the winter "tripledemic" of respiratory viruses from wrecking upcoming holiday travel and family gatherings?
People know when they have Covid symptoms, but do minor sniffles at the end of a coronavirus infection, for example, mean they’re still contagious?
So many Covid questions!
It’s a good time to brush up on what scientists know, and still don’t know, about how long people remain infectious with viral diseases — Covid, influenza, RSV — that are spreading across the U.S.
How long am I contagious with Covid?
If you’ve been exposed to someone who has tested positive for Covid, symptoms from any of the omicron subvariants generally appear two to four days later.
How contagious you are is connected to how much of the virus, known as the viral load, is in your body.
Your viral load will likely peak soon after the start of symptoms, according to Dr. Chanu Rhee, an infectious disease physician and associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School.
This means you are likely most contagious a day or so before symptoms appear and during at least the first two or three days after.
As your immune system reduces your viral load, your infectiousness should decline in tandem.
“If folks are still very, very symptomatic, with a lot of coughing and a lot of upper respiratory symptoms, then the thought is they’re probably more infectious,” said Dr. Lisa. A. Cosimi, an infectious disease specialist at Harvard Medical School.
But determining whether you’re still somewhat infectious during the waning days of a Covid illness can be tricky.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that people who are experiencing moderate to severe symptoms to isolate for 10 days.
If your Covid illness is mild, the CDC advises that to protect others you should consider yourself infectious for at least five days from the onset of symptoms — or five days after a positive test, which counts as day zero.
A study of 66 people with nonsevere Covid published in the New England Journal of Medicine in July found that the median time until the participants were likely no longer infectious was six days when the delta variant of the virus was dominant, and eight days during the omicron wave.
According to an October study of 4,565 people with Covid, “overall, existing data suggest that infectiousness (using viral culture as a proxy) beyond 10 days is possible although less common.”
The investigators called for more research about whether people remain infectious after that point.
There have, however, been cases of immunocompromised people who have remained infectious for months, according to various infectious disease experts.
As far as relying on Covid tests to determine whether someone is still contagious, PCR tests are good at diagnosing Covid.
They are not reliable for determining ongoing infectiousness because they can detect fragments of the virus, which pose no risk of transmitting to others, for weeks or months after infection.
At-home rapid antigen tests aren’t perfect either.
Researchers rely on what are known as viral culture tests in which they take a swab of the coronavirus and see if they can grow the virus in the lab, as the best proxy for infectiousness.
But everyday people don’t have access to such tests.
In a recent study of 40 people with Covid, three quarters of them tested positive six days after their first positive test or the start of their symptoms, whichever came first.
As part of the research, the participants also received what are known as viral culture tests in which scientists see if they can grow the virus taken from a swab in the lab.
It's considered the best proxy for infectiousness.
About half of that group had a negative viral culture test at that time, suggesting they weren’t contagious.
Cosimi, the Harvard Medical School infectious disease specialist, was the lead author of the study and said that after day five of Covid — if people test negative when they have improved yet still have lingering symptoms — they’re likely not contagious.
She also said that if non-immunocompromised people feel well by day 11 but still test positive on an antigen test, “it is exceedingly unlikely” they’re still infectious.
According to the CDC, if you have no symptoms after day five, or if your Covid symptoms are improving and you haven’t had a fever for 24 hours, you can end your isolation period.
For days six through 10, you can go out but should wear a mask.
You don’t need to test to end your isolation period in these contexts.
The CDC says you can take the mask off early if you test negative on two consecutive rapid antigen tests 48 hours apart.
There's a condition, though.
“You should still wear a mask through day 10 because theoretically, you’re still infectious, even if your degree of infectivity has gone down,” said Rhee.
How long am I contagious if I've had Covid or am fully vaccinated and have a breakthrough infection?
Several studies have shown that vaccination helps the body clear the coronavirus more quickly.
Most of the studies, however, looked at patients infected with the older variants, Rhee said.
“The impact of prior immunity on infectiousness is not as clear for omicron variants.”
On average, unvaccinated people do indeed take longer to beat the infection, said Dr. Yonatan H. Grad, associate professor of immunology and infectious diseases at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health and senior author of a recent paper in the journal eLife in which he and his colleagues reached this conclusion.
“We do not know about duration of infectiousness,” Grad said in an email.
If I’m taking Paxlovid, am I contagious?
A study published in Clinical Infectious Diseases in July found that taking Paxlovid accelerates coronavirus clearance, which the authors said might reduce infectiousness.
Recent research has cast doubt on whether Paxlovid is driving cases of viral rebound, given that people who don’t take Paxlovid commonly rebound as well.
“What we don’t know is whether those rebounds are infectious or not,” said Dr. Donald Milton, a professor of environmental and occupational health at the University of Maryland.
Consequently, the CDC recommends restarting the isolation clock at day zero if a rebound occurs.
How long am I contagious with the flu or other viral illnesses?
With flu, RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) and the common cold, experts say, people are generally most infectious between a day or two before symptoms begin and then for a few days afterward.
The CDC recommends that people with the flu stay home until at least 24 hours after their fever subsides without the use of fever- reducing medication or after their symptoms have improved — at least four to five days after getting sick.
A 2010 study identified a close correlation between the decrease of flu symptoms, in particular fever, and a decrease in viral shedding, which indicates infectiousness.
“If you’re really sick, if you’ve got a fever, you may be infectious for a little bit longer,” said Aubree Gordon, an associate professor of epidemiology at the University of Michigan School of Public Health.
“The level of symptoms can be a guide for when you need to stay home.
But that does not mean if you have mild symptoms you aren’t contagious.”
Classic common cold symptoms include congestion, cough, a runny nose and low-grade fever.
Some cold symptoms can last from 10 to 14 days, according to the CDC.
For colds — which for adults may include RSV, a virus that can pose a serious threat to children under age 2 — Dr. David Strain, a senior clinical lecturer at the University of Exeter Medical School, said, “on the most part, you will only be infectious for as long as you’ve got symptoms.”
Long Covid:
Dr Sara Kayat discusses impact on children
Most people who experience COVID-19 will experience the symptoms for a matter of days or weeks, and then recover.
However, not everyone shakes it off fully.
For some, the nightmare of Covid continues as they are left managing long term symptoms of the virus.
This group of people, who experience the signs of Covid for longer than 12 weeks, form part of a growing cohort of long Covid patients.
While symptoms can vary from person to person and variant to variant, scientists are now beginning to understand just how long some of the symptoms last for.
Conducted by researchers from Italy and the UK, a new study has sought to understand how long some symptoms of COVID-19 last for.
Specifically, the authors wanted to know how long it takes for mildly symptomatic patients to recover from some of the early symptoms of COVID-19, namely a lost of sense of taste and smell.
The study concluded most patients recovered their sense of smell within two years.
In discussion of their study, they wrote: “88.2% of patients reporting a COVID-19–related smell or taste dysfunction completely recovered within 2 years.
A late recovery was observed in 10.9% of patients.”
READ MORE: Liver disease: The ‘early’ symptom that shows up at night - 'see your GP'
Some Covid symptoms last for longer than others.
Although close to 90 percent of patients recovered their sense of smell, these patients still had to endure two years without it, an experience which for some may have proved extremely challenging.
What is the long Covid situation in the UK?
The situation in the UK is one fully of uncertainty and concern.
Estimates from the ONS (Office for National Statistics) estimate there are over two million people in the UK living with long Covid.
These patients vary in the severity of their symptoms.
Some patients can continue to work effectively at their jobs whilst other are bedridden or unable to work.
One of the most baffling elements of long Covid for scientists is not just the varying severity of symptoms but also the variety of symptoms, with some estimates that there could be over 200. DON'T
MISS Liver disease: The ‘early’ symptom that shows up at night - 'see your GP' [INSIGHT] Diabetes:
The cheese to ‘significantly' reduce blood sugar without increasing cholesterol [REPORT] Meghan Markle health: The Duchess on her hidden 'debilitating' illness - 'hospitalised'[REVEAL]
Trending
READ MORE Bowel cancer: The sign in your poo of cancer that's 'harder to cure' Why is there such a large list of symptoms?
The reason for this is twofold.
Firstly, each new mutation of COVID-19 brings with it a new variant.
Each variant causes different short term symptoms and therefore has the potential to cause different long term symptoms as well.
This change in variant was one of the caveats listed by the authors for their study; they stated several limitations and noted the data was taken for patients infected before the arrival of Omicron.
Furthermore, other study limitations listed by the authors included:
• Data was self-reported
• A psychological evaluation of the chemosensory function was not performed
•
The sample size was relatively small and geographically limited
• Patients with more severe symptoms were not included
• Data for chemosensory treatments was lacking.
As a result, the study is not considered definitive, but rather forms part of wider research in long Covid.
READ MORE: Vitamin B12:
The sign of low levels to spot in your feet when they're 'under a blanket'
SUBSCRIBE Invalid email We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you.
This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding.
You can unsubscribe at any time.
Read our Privacy Policy
Not all levels of symptom severity were covered by the study.
READ MORE Long Covid causing 'wider set' of symptoms than previously thought Should we be worried about long Covid?
This answer depends on who one talks to.
As it is difficult to predict who will get long Covid after a Covid infection, it is unwise for people who aren’t infected with Covid to worry.
While are treatments for COVID-19, there are very few treatments for long Covid, a condition scientists are still trying to understand.
Furthermore, these scientists have strong reason to believe that long Covid should be a concern to governments and their health systems.
Symptoms of long Covid to spot.
What are the symptoms of pallor?
Symptoms of pallor include:
Pale skin that’s lighter or grayer than your natural skin tone.
Pale mucous membranes on openings of your body, like inside of your mouth or on your eyelids.
If pallor occurs because of an underlying condition, you may experience the following symptoms in addition to skin paleness:
Advertisement
Where will I see symptoms of pallor?
Pallor can affect the skin on your whole body or your mucous membranes, but it’s most notable on your:
Face.
Fingernails.
Lining of your eyes.
Inside of your mouth.
What is localized pallor?
Localized pallor is a term that refers to paleness on only one limb.
For example, if you have localized pallor, you might only have paleness on your right arm after an injury.
Localized pallor may be a sign of an underlying condition, so it’s important to visit a healthcare provider if you have this symptom.
Advertisement
What causes pallor?
A decrease in blood supply and oxygen in your skin causes pallor.
There are many reasons why pallor occurs, ranging from:
An emotional response like fear or shock.
A side effect of a medication.
An underlying health condition.
What conditions cause pallor?
Pallor can be a symptom of a condition including but not limited to the following:
What are the risk factors for pallor?
Pallor can affect anyone, from children to adults.
It’s a common condition to find in movies and television shows during dramatic and suspenseful moments.
For example, a character feels fear or shock, turns pale and faints.
While these scenarios in the media aren’t the most accurately depicted, they bring awareness to the symptoms of pallor to look out for in yourself, your family and friends.
Vitamin B12 deficiency symptoms: Five signs you may be ignoring
According to a study in Neurology International published in August 2014, different vitamin deficiencies, including vitamin B12 deficiency, can cause muscle twitching.
But it’s also important to note twitches are common and rarely a sign of anything serious.
They usually go away on their own, but if a twitch lasts more than two weeks, speak to your GP.
Twitches are most often linked to stress and anxiety, tiredness and exhaustion, drinking caffeine or alcohol, and some medicines.
READ MORE:
Fatty liver disease symptoms: The visual warning sign on your legs, ankles and feet
The height of the novel coronavirus pandemic has arrived this winter — and unfortunately, data seems to project that things will only get worse.
According to information curated by monitors at Johns Hopkins University, the United States reported more cases of COVID-19 in the first week of 2021 than at any other point in 2020, and a record number of hospitalizations have occurred after the holiday season, per analysis by The Atlantic.
The likelihood of you or someone you love becoming infected (even following precautionary measures) may be higher than ever, depending on where you live.
There are a wide array of symptoms associated with COVID-19, and the severity of symptoms can vary greatly from person to person, even among those considered high-risk for complications.
For some, symptoms will become too severe for you to remain at home, and you will need to seek immediate care from health providers in an emergency room, hospital, or clinic to prevent serious risk to your long-term health and life.
Most people affected by the disease will self-isolate, however, and push past a range of mild to moderate symptoms that can be treated while recovering at home.
If you test positive for COVID-19, your very first course of action should be to contact your primary healthcare provider for help.
Even if you don't require immediate aid in an emergency room, you may have pre-existing health conditions that render some of the advice and instructions from leading health agencies (including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) unadvisable for your wellbeing.
Heed your doctor's advice first before considering other ways to help yourself get through COVID-19 symptoms.
With the help of a pair of leading infectious disease doctors, Good Housekeeping reviews ways in which you can ease a myriad of COVID-19 symptoms at home.
Below, we recap the right ways to help your body overcome an initial infection, and the best tools available to help.
This guide generalizes care recommendations prescribed by health officials for those impacted by SARS-CoV-2, the virus that leads to a COVID-19 diagnosis.
It is not intended to replace or substitute medical or treatment advice from a licensed healthcare professional.
Dial 911 if you are experiencing life-threatening symptoms, and seek medical advice from a healthcare provider after a COVID-19 diagnosis.
The views reflected in this article are educational in nature and are shared to supplement individual treatment plans; you can find more recommendations from the CDC, World Health Organization, and your local public health department.
Which medications are best for COVID-19?
Everyone's COVID-19 treatment recommendations will be different, and since this is a relatively new disease, there isn't a single drug that can speed up your recovery.
Theodore Bailey, MD, chief of the Division of Infectious Diseases at the Greater Baltimore Medical Center, says that a doctor may prescribe an antiviral drug or anti-inflammatory medications after you've been diagnosed, but over-the-counter medications are only intended to "make the process of being sick more comfortable.
"
Certain categories of drugs at your pharmacy or sold online can help reduce the severity of some of the most common COVID-19 symptoms.
If you want to be prepared just in case, keep your cabinet stocked with the following:
Pain reducers: Also known as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), these include aspirin, ibuprofen, and naproxen (so brands like Advil, Motrin, Aleve, and Anaprox).
They work to reduce inflammation and bodily aches, even sore throat, and they may also have an effect on your fever as well.
Fever reducers: Primarily acetaminophen, in addition to other antipyretics, which can help manage your body's fever if you're continually breaking out in sweats or suffering chills.
If you have high blood pressure, liver disease, or other pre-existing conditions, acetaminophen may be a safer choice compared to NSAIDs.
Cough medicine, suppressants: Dr. Bailey explains that persistent dry cough is a COVID-19 symptom that can cause pain, and cough medicine (particularly those that suppress coughing fits) can help you be more comfortable in recovery.
Vitamin C and zinc: Supplements are often used to boost one's immunity before falling ill, but they're not shown to actively impact COVID-19 progression in any way, Dr. Bailey clarifies.
Antioxidants are generally safe as they're easy on kidneys and have been used historically in the flu and cold season — you can safely shop and take vitamin C and zinc supplements to aid your body's immune response to the disease.
Herbal supplements aren't regulated by the Food and Drug Administration, and aren't associated with COVID-19 treatments in most capacities by infectious disease doctors.
Which medication should I avoid if I have COVID-19?
Nausea and diarrhea, as well as congested airways, can be two hallmark COVID-19 symptoms for many.
But you don't want to immediately treat those issues with over-the-counter products without asking a doctor first.
Your digestive tract is likely in the process of eliminating bacteria, and you don't want to stop it from doing so, explains Joshua K. Schaffzin, MD, PhD, the director of Infection Control and Prevention at Cincinnati Children's Hospital.
Anything containing the anti-diarrheal loperamide can prevent shorter-lived symptoms from running their course, and there are other ways to help yourself feel more comfortable.
"Slowing down your gut and not clearing out an infection or inflammation isn't helpful… the key is staying hydrated and just letting it take its course, for most," Dr. Schaffzin says.
And certain decongestants — and inhalers, which should only be used by those with asthma — may hinder your health rather than provide instant relief.
Anything containing phenylephrine, which is the active ingredient in many popular over-the-counter nasal decongestants, may be particularly harmful to those with cardiovascular issues.
"What [these drugs] do is they cause small blood vessels in the nose to close up so that you don't get as much blood flow, and you just don't get as much fluid coming out," Dr. Schaffzin adds.
"For people with high blood pressure, that can really be an issue, because it will close up vessels elsewhere as well.
"
What food should I avoid if I have COVID-19?
Your diet should be one of the first things you optimize after learning that you've been diagnosed with COVID-19.
Reduced appetite has been cited as a common side effect for most, but pushing yourself to reach for supercharged snacks or even increased liquids can help your body respond better to other symptoms, Dr. Bailey stresses.
"You should be doing your best to maintain a well-balanced diet, a normal caloric intake, and definitely maintain good hydration," he adds.
You'll want to prioritize unprocessed foods and items high in minerals and antioxidants to replenish your body's supply; double down on fruits, vegetables, legumes, whole grains like starchy brown rice or wheat, and lean meats when possible.
Make a List: What to Buy for Coronavirus Preparation
It's equally important to make yourself drink more liquids to keep yourself hydrated: "Turn to whatever balanced drink you prefer, whether it be water or a sports drink, as long as it's not packed with sugar or unhealthy additives," Dr. Bailey clarifies.
If you prefer a beverage like Gatorade or a hot cup of your favorite tea, go for it — but plain water is important in keeping hydrated during your sickness.
It's easier to define the things you shouldn't be reaching for while you're in recovery.
Stay clear from these foods if you can, as each can hamper your body's ability to fight symptoms:
Overly salty foods , including processed snacks or meats like bacon.
, including processed snacks or meats like bacon.
Sugary foods, especially high sources of added sugar, like cookies and cakes.
especially high sources of added sugar, like cookies and cakes.
Soft drinks and sugary fruit drinks.
Eating a balanced diet while in recovery may help your body feel more energized, Dr. Bailey explains.
It's also important to get up a move, despite your fatigue, Dr. Bailey add:"Possibly take a walk outside each day if you can safely, as that's going to help you maintain your strength," he says.
Which tools can help me ease COVID-19 symptoms?
There are a few gadgets that can help alleviate your symptoms and keep you in the loop on how your body is progressing.
Humidifier: Especially in the winter season, if you're confined to one room in a household, it's important to ensure that the air supply is moist enough to not irritate your lungs, nose, and throat.
Experts at the Mayo Clinic recommend that indoor humidity should hover between 30 and 50% to keep your respiratory system comfortable.
"Be sure to clean the humidifier thoroughly between each tank refill if possible, and to keep it in one area of the house if you're living in a shared space," Dr. Schaffzin recommends.
If your space isn't well ventilated with clean, dust-free air, having access to an air purifier may help ease the strain on your respiratory system, too.
Extra clean laundry: Many people experience high fevers and may sweat through their linens, blankets, and clothes easily.
If you've been diagnosed, making sure you have ample clothing and linens on hand to stay warm and dry can save you from being stuck with sweaty bed sheets or fouled clothes.
Thermometer or thermal temperature scanner: These can help you know when you need to use certain medications, but more importantly, it can provide critical data for doctors who are monitoring your situation outside of the home.
"Knowing a documented fever helps us track when it comes, when it goes, when it fluctuates — it really helps us manage illness, and step in if we should need to," Dr. Schaffzin adds.
Pulse oximeter: If you have a confirmed case of COVID-19, having access to a pulse oximeter — which uses light to scan blood running through your finger, for example, to read oxygen saturation levels — can be key to saving yourself from being rushed into a hospital.
It provides a key metric for doctors, who may instruct you to seek treatment immediately if the reading is consecutively worrisome.
"There has been a disconnect between how sick people feel, and actually how low their oxygen is," Dr. Bailey says.
"They may be sick, but they don't feel particularly short of breath, and yet their disease is actually worsening, and they're dealing with very low levels of oxygen in the body.
"
What should I do if my child is dealing with COVID-19 symptoms?
Family members should take extreme caution when caring for someone who has become sick with COVID-19 in their home due to the highly contagious nature of the disease.
The CDC has published a full guide to all of the precautions you must take when looking after sick children, which includes similar advice for adults; sequestering them in a separate room and facility, wearing masks at all times, and plenty of disinfection and cleaning, among other tactics.
Specializing in pediatric care, Dr. Schaffzin says parents or caregivers will often know their child best, and can immediately tell when symptoms take a turn for the worse.
Parents of kids with preexisting conditions should have plans in place for if COVID-19 hits them, but parents should always call physicians or healthcare providers on the spot if symptoms become too difficult to work through.
Primarily, though, the Cincinnati Children's Hospital expert says that some of the most challenging symptoms may come weeks or months after an initial COVID-19 diagnosis.
"While COVID infections do not appear to cause as severe disease in kids as it does adults, kids are at greater risk for post-infectious and inflammatory conditions.
Your child's immune system can go into overdrive long after initial infection," Dr. Schaffzin explains, referencing pediatric multi-system inflammatory syndrome, which prompts inflammation in the body for long periods of time.
"And so what you're watching for first and foremost is fever… and watch for that carefully, because it's important to catch it early before a child lands in the hospital.
"
The syndrome often manifests in rashes, across the body and in hands and feet, or in chronic abdominal pain and aches, in addition to other symptoms.
When should I go to the hospital if I have COVID-19?
Despite your best efforts, you may be directed by your doctor to head to the hospital if you are getting sicker, even after the initial diagnosis has passed.
If any of the following occurs while you're at home, whether you've spoken to your doctor or not, be sure to head to the emergency room:
Unable to breathe normally : If you're short on breath, try shifting positions, or lay face down on your bed in an attempt to stabilize your oxygen levels (what doctors call the 'prone' position).
If the issue persists, especially with any of the other warnings signs on this list, call 911.
: If you're short on breath, try shifting positions, or lay face down on your bed in an attempt to stabilize your oxygen levels (what doctors call the 'prone' position).
If the issue persists, especially with any of the other warnings signs on this list, Chest pain: One of the most serious side effects of a COVID-19 infection is that blood clots can form, and sustained chest pain may indicate that a clot is causing a blockage or other serious danger in your arteries.
Imaging in an emergency room could determine if your pain is due to clots anywhere in your abdomen.
One of the most serious side effects of a COVID-19 infection is that blood clots can form, and sustained chest pain may indicate that a clot is causing a blockage or other serious danger in your arteries.
Imaging in an emergency room could determine if your pain is due to clots anywhere in your abdomen.
Decreased consciousness : If you are feeling confused or delirious, unable to focus but for short periods of time, or unable to stay awake, this may be caused by low oxygen levels or by cardiovascular issues, which should be assessed immediately.
:
If you are feeling confused or delirious, unable to focus but for short periods of time, or unable to stay awake, this may be caused by low oxygen levels or by cardiovascular issues, which should be assessed immediately.
Few or nonexistent bathroom trips: If you're not making as much urine as you normally do, or any at all, it's a sign that you've become seriously dehydrated, Dr. Bailey explains.
This may lead to mild COVID-19 symptoms becoming deadly if left unchecked.
If you're not making as much urine as you normally do, or any at all, it's a sign that you've become seriously dehydrated, Dr. Bailey explains.
This may lead to mild COVID-19 symptoms becoming deadly if left unchecked.
Blue lips or face: Known as cyanosis, this condition indicates that your blood doesn't have enough oxygen for your body.
It's a hallmark sign of a serious COVID-19 infection, especially when seen alongside any other condition on this list.
If you're in a shared home, living with loved ones or family, it feels natural to ask them for help in caring for you if symptoms continue to worsen.
But Dr. Bailey explains that those who are experiencing severe COVID-19 symptoms and don't head for the hospital are putting their loved ones in extreme danger.
"If there's a point where you're really not able to take care of yourself, it's going to be really dangerous for non-professional household members to try and take care of you," he explains.
"The level of protection and skill is not going to be comparable to trained nurses and doctors.
And so it would lead to two or more cases in the same household instead of one.
We have to check our instincts here — if you need serious help, it needs to come from the hospital, not from family members.
"
As more information about the coronavirus pandemic develops, some of the information in this story may have changed since it was last updated.
We'll update this article with new guidance as it becomes available.
Support from readers like you helps us do our best work.
Subscribe to Good Housekeeping and get the magazine plus full digital access.
And sign up for our FREE newsletter for daily health, nutrition, and home advice.
Diabetes: The drink that lowers blood sugar within 30 minutes
While there are many symptoms of hypertension people may be aware of, such as heart palpitations or dizzy spells, two NHS doctors explained some key changes to patients' eyes that people may not realise are associated with blood pressure.
What eye changes could be linked with high blood pressure?
Speaking to Express.co.uk, NHS GP Dr Gary Bartlett said: "If patients do experience symptoms, symptoms are often vague.
"Patients may report headaches and possible blurred vision.
"
NHS GP Dr Rachel Ward added: "Occasionally people experience dizzy (spells) and feel lethargic and we may see symptoms such as burst blood vessels in the eye.
"
High blood pressure can damage the "tiny, delicate blood vessels behind the eyes" Dr Bartlett explained.
READ MORE:
Pfizer booster shot: The five most common side effects reported
“When I said to him, ‘I think I’m starting menopause,’ he laughed out loud as if it was the most ridiculous thing he had ever heard,” Ms. Fogle said.
“Not only that, he literally called his nurse in and said, ‘Can you believe this woman?’
Like I wasn’t even in the room.”
She was so turned off by that interaction that she decided she was better off just “muddling through” without medical help, she said.
Perimenopause lasts four to 10 years on average.
For Ms. Fogle, it lasted over 15 years — she reached menopause (defined as not having periods for 12 consecutive months) when she turned 50.
The patient's history alone is rarely a reliable differentiator between viral and bacterial pharyngitis.
However, persistence of symptoms beyond 10 days or progressive worsening after the first 5-7 days suggests a bacterial illness.
Assessment for group A streptococci warrants special attention.
Pharyngeal symptoms of sore or scratchy throat, odynophagia, or dysphagia are common.
If the uvula or posterior pharynx is inflamed, the patient may have an uncomfortable feeling of a lump when swallowing.
Nasal obstruction may cause mouth breathing, which may result in dry mouth, especially in the morning.
Group A streptococcal infections often produce a sudden sore throat.
Fever increases the suspicion that infection with group A streptococci is present, as does the absence of cough, rhinorrhea, and conjunctivitis because these are common in viral syndrome.
Nasal symptoms of rhinorrhea, congestion or obstruction of nasal breathing, and sneezing are common early in the course.
Clinically significant rhinorrhea is more characteristic of a viral infection rather than a bacterial infection.
In viral URI, secretions often evolve from clear to opaque white to green to yellow within 2-3 days of symptom onset.
Thus, color and opacity do not reliably distinguish viral from bacterial illness.
Acute viral rhinosinusitis typically has symptom resolution within 10 days, with a peak at 3-6 days.
If symptoms last longer than 10 days, or if they improve and worsen within 10 days, acute bacterial rhinosinusitis is more likely.
Pharyngeal erythema is typically marked in adenoviral infection.
In contrast, rhinoviral and coronaviral infections are not likely to manifest as severe erythema.
Read more about the presentation of URIs.
India is witnessing a sudden rise in new COVID cases triggered by a new variant XBB.1.16, which is also known as Arcturus.
Apart from a rapid rise in cases, experts have pointed out that they are also noticing new symptoms emerging, which were not seen during the earlier waves.
And what is more concerning is the fact that it is once again attacking children.
What are the latest symptoms of COVID?
Hospitals once again started getting pediatric Covid cases after a gap of 6 months.
Some of the top symptoms include high fever, cold and cough, and non-purulent, cited Vipin M Vashishtha, former convenor of Indian Academy of Pediatrics and consultant paediatrician at the Mangla Hospital and Research Centre, Bijnor.
Vashishtha also mentioned that many are reporting itchy conjunctivitis and sticky eyes, a symptom that was not seen in earlier waves.
The expert had earlier warned about XBB.1.16 saying that the variant has a 140% growth advantage over XBB.1.5, making it more aggressive.
Can the variant cause severe infection?
Last week, WHO official Maria Van Kerkhove pointed out, the subvariant has been circulating for a few months, and it doesn’t appear to cause more severe disease.
However, “One of the things we are very concerned about is the potential for the virus to change to become not only more transmissible but more severe," Van Kerkhove said.
“So we have to remain vigilant.
"
Meanwhile, Union Health Minister Dr Mansukh Mandaviya on Friday chaired a review meeting with health ministers of all states and Union Territories through video conferencing.
As many 6,050 fresh Covid-19 infections were recorded in the country in the last 24 hours, marking a significant jump from Thursday's tally of 5,335 cases, the Union health ministry said.
India's active Covid caseload currently stands at 28,303 with a daily positivity rate of 3.39 per cent.
"We need to remain alert but there is no need to worry.
Currently, the sub-variant of Omicron, which is circulating in the country, hasn't led to an increase in the rate of hospitalisation," Mandaviya said earlier on the Covid-19 situation in the country.
Covid cases in the country have seen an upward trend in the past few days, with the daily fresh infections at 2,994 on April 1, 3,824 on April 2, 3,641 on April 3 and 3,038 on April 4 and 4,435 on April 5.
Milestone Alert!
Livemint tops charts as the fastest growing news website in the world 🌏
Click here to know more.
Unlock a world of Benefits!
From insightful newsletters to real-time stock tracking, breaking news and a personalized newsfeed - it's all here, just a click away!
Login Now!
BHUBANESWAR:
Doctors have warned against neglecting gastrointestinal manifestations of dengue infection (colic, loose motion, vomiting) as dengue cases are still being reported across the state, mostly from the capital city.
Doctors said one of the early signs of dengue is uncontrolled vomiting, which can lead to dengue shock syndrome (acute dehydration).Many dengue-positive patients are presenting gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms which look like food poisoning or result of contaminated water but on testing it is revealed that those symptoms were because of dengue.
“Detection of dengue is necessary as medical intervention can save the patient from shock syndrome or haemorrhagic fever (that occurs when blood platelet count sharply falls).
Upon finding that one has acute stomach pain followed by vomiting, one should not shy away from getting a test done,” said director of public health Niranjan Mishra .He said early detection can help doctors take conservative managements to keep the patient hydrated by administering intravenous fluids.
Many patients can’t take oral fluids because sometimes the body rejects those.
In that case, admission is required and doctors provide saline and other injections, he added.
Officials said August was the peak of dengue last year but this year, it has peaked in September.
The state so far has tested 27,248 samples this year (till September 19) compared to 15,000-plus samples tested last year.
In 2021, the state reported 3,780 cases while this year despite more samples being tested, the infection till September 19 is 3,525.The capital city, which is the hotspot of dengue, has seen 2,100-plus positive cases so far.
Dr Manoj Sahu, senior gastroenterologist, said people tend to ignore gastrointestinal symptoms as they appear like colitis, which people blame on contaminated food.
Since it is dengue season and this vector-borne disease commonly manifests in GI complications, people need to be aware.
The dengue virus directly infects liver and GI cells, he said.
Antaryami Mishra, additional district urban public health officer, said dengue cases in Bhubaneswar have begun to stabilise.
A week ago, 50-70 cases were being reported.
But now, the daily case count has come down to 20-25.
Tests are being conducted at three centres — AIIMS, Capital Hospital and ICMR in Bhubaneswar.
Elisa test method is most reliable, he said.
More than 40 million people have been deemed recovered from coronavirus globally but it looks like beating the initial sickness is not the only battle that Covid-19 survivors have to fight.
While a Covid positive patient may recover within two or three weeks, scientists are now saying that sickness could bounce back in different forms within the next few months.
advertisement
The latest study by the Journal of American Medical Association (JAMA) shows that a rare multisystem inflammatory illness could be developed in some of the Covid-19 survivors.
This could turn into a major challenge for public health across the world.
The deadly virus takes a toll on the immune system of the survivor.
It could leave survivors with further health complications, including strokes, pulmonary embolisms, and even heart attacks, leading to sudden death.
The Covid-19 virus infection could lead to developing multi-system hyperinflammatory syndrome, leading to multi-organ failure and shocks in survivors, a recent study published in the Journal of American Medical Association (JAMA) shows.
“A rare multisystem inflammatory illness has been observed in both children and adults following acute SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Distinct from early inflammation resulting from viral replication and cell death, hyperinflammation can occur in organ systems distinct from those affected during Covid-19 and can begin after host clearance of SARS-CoV-2 infection,” S. Deblina Datta, the lead author, associated with Covid-19 Response, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia observed in the research paper.
According to the JAMA research, Covid-19 Infection is characterised by three illness periods.
The first phase is the beginning of infection with fever, cough, difficulty in breathing with RTPCR positivity.
The research maintained that ‘symptomatic infection is not a necessary precursor to later illnesses’ as asymptomatic patients could also suffer from late illnesses.
The second phase sign manifests after 2 to 5 weeks of the Covid-19 infection.
Covid-19 primarily affects the respiratory system.
However, in the second phase - the hyperinflammation can occur in a different organ system entirely separate from those affected during Covid-19.
In this phase, patients may have cardiovascular, gastrointestinal and dermatological symptoms.
In the third phase, patients have symptoms of fatigue, breathlessness, joint pain, and chest pain after 60 days of infection.
According to the study, 87% of previously hospitalised patients had one or more persistent symptoms even after 60 days from the onset of the infection.
Former Professor and Head of Dept of Pulmonary AIIMSG C Khilnani told India Today that this phase is potentially severe and could be life-threatening as deadly virus dysregulated host immune response.
“This phase of the illness is poetically serious and life-threatening with a patient requiring ICU care.
Therefore, if there are symptoms of fever, cough, chest discomfort with or without low oxygen levels after initial recovery; then, the patient and family must not ignore and seek medical attention,” Khilanai added.
advertisement
Experts advised that care of patients with Covid-19 must not stop at two weeks but should continue with judicious use of medication and supportive therapy which include physiotherapy and counselling.
“Recognition of the post-infection illness would lead us to address this phase of the disease with anti-inflammatory agents and other supportive therapies without loading patients with an unnecessarily high dose of expensive antibiotic,” Khilnani further added.
SARS-CoV-2, the virus behind Covid-19 infection, belongs to a family of single-stranded RNA.
Viruses in this family are known for their deadly attack on the respiratory, neurological, cardiovascular (heart and blood vessels), liver, and gut systems.
India reported more than 94 lakh Covid-19 cases as on Tuesday morning.
Of these about 93 per cent have been officially discharged or recovered.
However, as per the said research, these survivors need to be careful of the post-Covid-19 sickness.
Pakistani dramas have finally begun telling stories with a cause.
Whether it’s Udaari tackling child sexual abuse, Baaghi shedding light on honour killing, Sammi creating awareness about gender discrimination or Khaas and Kankar serving up something more than the saas bahu time pass that we’re so used to, our dramas have indeed stepped up their game.
Saraab featuring Sami Khan and Sonya Hussyn is another upcoming serial that will be using storytelling to educate; the drama aims to create awareness about schizophrenia, a chronic mental health condition which disrupts thinking patterns and affects functions of the brain in interpreting reality.
It seemed like the teasers were attracting just the right kind of attention and everything looked promising until Hussyn posted an image on Instagram in an effort to destigmatise mental health issues.
Clubbed together with terms like anorexia and PTSD was autism.
A photo posted by Instagram (@instagram) on Mar 22, 2015 at 11:21am PDT
Things went south fast when the actor tried to explain to a mother of two autistic kids what autism is.
Taking to the comments, the mom shared with Hussyn that autism is NOT a mental illness but instead a disorder/disability.
“I have Masha Allah 2 kids who have autism so I know what I’m talking about," she posted.
"Otherwise, a great message and very important to highlight it and create awareness about a very sensitive topic.”
We don't know about you guys but usually, when someone talks about their lived experience, we tend to listen.
However, the Aangan actor went on to reply that "autism was one of the symptoms in schizophrenia".
While we can understand how she could have confused the two, a simple Google search would have sufficed to clear out any misconceptions.
Thankfully, most people called her out on this comment and some with autistic relatives even did the emotional labour of explaining what the difference was.
“Please do your research before picking up a script.
And please don’t start throwing terms because it’s cool to speak about these topics.
Autism is a neurodevelopment condition," responded one follower.
"My nephew is autistic and he would remember grocery totals from 2 months ago.
He would listen to RAP song once and recite the lyrics to you in a jiffy, so please.”
Due to genetic overlaps between patients of the two distinct conditions, we can see how Hussyn might have gotten things mixed up.
That said, the general consensus by professionals is that autism is not an illness or disease but a developmental disorder that just means that the brain works slightly different than that of an average person; this also means that an autistic person may have average or above average intelligence.
When artists lend themselves and their voices to advocate for important issues, it's essential for them to inform themselves.
What Sonya failed to portray by her comment is the delicacy with which conversations about mental health awareness needs to be tackled.
Perhaps this can be a lesson for our public figures to enlighten themselves about a topic before commenting about it on social media or otherwise.
For what it’s worth, her acting seems on point in the teasers and we’ll wait to see how the issue is handled once Saraab is aired on screen.
September 28, 2021 — A research team at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (UAMS) has identified a potential cause of long-lasting symptoms experienced by COVID-19 long-hauler patients.
They found an antibody creates problems for the immune system by attacking the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2).
The findings were published in the journal Public Library of Science ONE (PLOS ONE).[1]
At the heart of the team’s findings is an antibody that shows up weeks after an initial infection and attacks and disrupts a key regulator of the immune system, said lead researcher John Arthur, M.D., Ph.D., professor and chief of the Division of Nephrology in the UAMS College of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine.
The antibody creates problems for the immune system by attacking the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2).
The ACE2 enzyme helps regulate the body’s response to the virus by metabolizing a peptide that activates the immune system.
The attacking antibody interferes with ACE2’s work, which makes the antibody a prime suspect for the long-lasting illness.
As many as 30% of COVID-19 patients experience lingering fatigue, brain fog and shortness of breath.
The cause of long COVID-19 has eluded scientists, but the UAMS team’s discovery sheds important new light on the molecular-level mechanisms behind it.
“Everything that we’ve found is consistent with this antibody as the instigator of long COVID, so it’s an exciting development that merits further study,” Arthur said.
The research team was brought together quickly this spring by the UAMS Translational Research Institute to test the hypothesis that developed through discussions between Arthur and UAMS’ Terry Harville, M.D., Ph.D., a professor in the Department of Pathology and medical director of the Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics Laboratories.
Researchers Karl Boehme, Ph.D., Craig Forrest, Ph.D., and Shana Owens, Ph.D., in the Department of Microbiology and Immunology developed the assay (test) used to identify the two antibodies.
Researchers tested plasma or serum for ACE2 antibodies in 67 patients with known SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19) infection and 13 with no history of infection.
In 81% of blood samples from patients in Arkansas and Oklahoma with a history of COVID-19, the samples had the antibody that attacked the ACE2.
In participants with no history of COVID-19, no antibodies were created to attack the ACE2 enzyme.
“If we show that the whole hypothesis is right, that this interference of ACE2 really does cause long COVID, then it opens up many potential treatments,” Arthur said.
“If our next steps confirm that this antibody is the cause of long COVID symptoms, there are medications that should work to treat them.
If we get to that phase of research, the next step would be to test these drugs and hopefully relieve people of the symptoms they're having.”
The multidisciplinary team also includes College of Medicine researchers Christian Herzog, Ph.D., Department of Internal Medicine; Josh Kennedy, M.D., Department of Pediatrics; and Juan Liu, Ph.D., from the Department of Pathology.
“This is true team science,” Arthur said.
“We put together a great group of investigators that had never worked together to produce these very exciting results.”
For more information: www.uams.edu or www.uamshealth.com
Related Cardiology Related COVID-19 Content:
Large Study Confirms Statins Reduce COVID-19 Severity
First Randomized Trial Backs Safety of ACE and ARB Heart Drugs in COVID-19 Patients
No Evidence Supporting Discontinuing RAAS Inhibitors in COVID-19 Patients
VIDEO:
What Cardiologists Need to Know about COVID-19 — Interview with Thomas Maddox, M.D.
The Cardiac Implications of Novel Coronavirus
ESC Council on Hypertension Says ACE-I and ARBs Do Not Increase COVID-19 Mortality
AHA Explains Severe COVID-19 is Closely Associated With Heart Issues
Reference:
1.
Development of ACE2 autoantibodies after SARS-CoV-2 infection.
PLOS One.
Published Sept. 3, 2021.
16(9): e0257016.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0257016.
It’s very easy to miss the symptoms of lung cancer until it progresses and begins to spread to other places.
At this point, the cancer becomes more aggressive and harder to treat.
However, spotting an unusual symptom could result in an earlier diagnosis.
Do you know the symptoms of lung cancer to look out for?
Fatty liver disease: Signs when you go to the toilet
On an average day in the UK, 130 people will be diagnosed with lung cancer.
The third most common cancer in Britain, there are around 47,800 new lung cancer cases in the UK every year, according to statistics from Cancer Research.
Approximately 70 percent of lung cancer cases are because of smoking, while smoking 25 cigarettes a day increases your risk of lung cancer 25 times, according to the NHS.
Although most cases of lung cancer are linked to smoking, you can develop lung cancer even if you’ve never been a smoker.
Lung cancer is fairly rare in people under the age of 40, whereas four out of 10 cases are diagnosed in people aged over 75.
As with all cancers, early diagnosis is vital for the best chance of successful treatment and survival.
But what are the symptoms to look out for?
READ MORE: The hot drink shown to 'significantly' reduce high blood pressure
Summary: Researchers have identified two distinct brain regions, one linked to increased and the other with decreased depressive symptoms, associated with the location of brain injuries.
Source: University of Iowa
A new study that links the location of brain injury to levels of depression in patients following the injury has identified two distinct brain networks; one associated with increased depression symptoms and one associated with decreased depression symptoms.
The large-scale study led by researchers with University of Iowa Health Care expands on previous findings and suggests that these brain networks might be potential targets for neuromodulation therapies to treat depression.
Neuromodulation therapies such as transcranial magnetic stimulation, or deep brain stimulation, are emerging as new non-pharmacological treatments for mood disorders.
However, understanding which areas of the brain to target to get the best therapeutic effect is still limited.
The new findings, which are published in the journal Brain, used brain imaging scans and depression scores from 526 patients who had acquired localized areas of brain injury from a stroke or other type of traumatic brain injury.
A detailed statistical analysis of the patients’ data allowed the researchers to correlate the brain lesion locations with levels of depression experienced by the patients in the months following the brain injury.
“We found some really interesting results identifying specific brain structures that were associated with higher levels of depression post lesion, and surprisingly, also found some areas that were associated with lower-than-average levels of depression post lesion.”
says Nicholas Trapp, MD, UI assistant professor of psychiatry and lead author of the study.
Risk and resilience networks in depression
Using data from functional brain scans of healthy subjects to understand how these structures were interconnected, the researchers then discovered that the risk and resilience regions were not randomly scattered within the brain.
Instead, regions most strongly associated with increased depression coincided with the nodes of the so-called salience network, which is involved in task reorientation, attention, and emotion processing.
In contrast, peak resilience regions that were associated with less depression, were part of a network known as the default mode network, which is thought to be involved in introspection, or self-referential thinking.
“Previous studies have suggested nodes of this network may be hyperactive in people with depression, who are prone to ruminating,” says Trapp, who also is a member of the Iowa Neuroscience Institute.
“It’s possible that lesions within this network may alter that circuit in a way that leads people to report less depression.”
Trapp hopes the findings will improve understanding of the causes of depression and potentially lead to better treatments.
Image is in the public domain
Patients whose brain lesions did not fall within either network had an average score of depression following their brain injury and provided a comparison group in the study.
Strength in numbers
The initial lesion mapping approach used by Trapp and his colleagues is a powerful tool for inferring if a brain region is required for a behavior, emotion, or cognitive ability.
If damage to a specific area leads to loss of the ability, the area is most likely required for the ability.
However, identifying an effect when the regions are spread across a network within the brain requires data from many patients, which may have hindered earlier smaller studies.
Trapp and his team were able to conduct they study thanks to two large patient registries: the Iowa Neurological Patient Registry based at the UI, and the Vietnam head injury study, which is affiliated with researchers at Northwestern University.
“Being able to identify these brain regions is really a product of having a large sample to study,” Trapp says.
“It’s very challenging to recruit these patients and collect the data that’s required.
The decades of efforts here at the University of Iowa (establishing and maintaining the Iowa Neurological Patient Registry) positions us extremely well to do these types of studies.”
Trapp hopes the findings will improve understanding of the causes of depression and potentially lead to better treatments.
“This could open the doors to potential studies looking at deep brain stimulation, or non-invasive forms of stimulation like TMS, where we might be able to modulate the specific brain areas or networks that we’ve identified, to try to get antidepressant effect, or potentially other therapeutic effects,” he says.
About this depression research news
Author: Press Office
Source: University of Iowa
Contact: Press Office – University of Iowa
Image:
The image is in the public domain
Original Research: Closed access.
“Large-scale lesion symptom mapping of depression identifies brain regions for risk and resilience” by Nicholas T Trapp et al.
Brain
Abstract
Large-scale lesion symptom mapping of depression identifies brain regions for risk and resilience
Understanding neural circuits that support mood is a central goal of affective neuroscience, and improved understanding of the anatomy could inform more targeted interventions in mood disorders.
Lesion studies provide a method of inferring the anatomical sites causally related to specific functions, including mood.
Here, we perform a large-scale study evaluating the location of acquired, focal brain lesions in relation to symptoms of depression.
526 individuals participated in the study across 2 sites (356 male, average age 52.4 +/- 14.5 years).
Each subject had a focal brain lesion identified on structural imaging and an assessment of depression using the Beck Depression Inventory-II, both obtained in the chronic period post-lesion (>3 months).
Multivariate lesion-symptom mapping was performed to identify lesion sites associated with higher or lower depression symptom burden, which we refer to as “risk” versus “resilience” regions.
The brain networks and white matter tracts associated with peak regional findings were identified using functional and structural lesion network mapping, respectively.
Lesion-symptom mapping identified brain regions significantly associated with both higher and lower depression severity (r = 0.11; p = 0.01).
Peak “risk” regions include the bilateral anterior insula, bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and left dorsomedial prefrontal cortex.
Functional lesion network mapping demonstrated that these “risk” regions localized to nodes of the salience network.
Peak “resilience” regions include the right orbitofrontal cortex, right medial prefrontal cortex, and right inferolateral temporal cortex, nodes of the default mode network.
Structural lesion network mapping implicated dorsal prefrontal white matter tracts as “risk” tracts and ventral prefrontal white matter tracts as “resilience” tracts, although the structural lesion network mapping findings did not survive correction for multiple comparisons.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that lesions to specific nodes of the salience network and default mode network are associated with greater risk versus resiliency for depression symptoms in the setting of focal brain lesions.
For some COVID-19 patients, a lingering loss of sense of smell is the most long lasting symptom of the virus.
It's something health experts say can affect your quality of life.
For FOX 17 News Photojournalist Ryan Brooker - the loss of smell has come in waves and still lingers to this day.
Brooker tested positive for coronavirus back in August.
He started running a fever, had the chills and overall started feeling really bad.
Fast forward to today
and he's still experiencing a loss of smell.
And he is far from alone.
A study published in the discovered that 86% of people with mild forms of COVID-19 had developed a loss of smell.
In more moderate to severe cases, the percentage dropped significantly to 4-7%.
Researchers included 2,500 people from Italy, Belgium and France who reported regaining their senses in about two months.
But that hasn't been the case for Brooker.
“It's really emotionally tough on me, it's hard for people to understand what I am going through,” Brooker said.
“I want to eat good food, it's really tough to see your family there enjoying turkey and stuffing and mashed potatoes
and I smell natural gas.”
Brooker got COVID-19 on Aug. 1, it was not a severe case it was done in a week.
But the smell thing, that's where things get strange, first he lost his smell, then he got it back.
Then in October another respiratory illness and his nose went haywire.
"In October I started smelling really foul smells, mostly with cooked foods, in the oven or microwave, it smelled like natural gas and everything has that distinct smell and its really horrible," Brooker said.
This loss of smell now going on five months is more serious than you might think.
Dr. Justin Turner runs a smell and taste lab at Vanderbilt, he is an ear, nose and throat doctor with an impressive resume.
"Just from a day to day, you can't smell smoke if your house is on fire, you can't smell gas leaks, you can't smell spoiled food, those are really problematic from a day to day functional standpoint," Dr. Tuner said.
Dr. Turner says all upper respiratory viruses can cause a loss of smell, but he is seeing 50 to 80 percent of his virus patients with smell issues.
He says while two-thirds get their smells back, about one-third are really struggling.
And although Brooker hates that his bacon smells like natural gas, it's actually a good sign.
"Usually, when you are experiencing things like that, it is a sign that your sense of smell is recovering and returning if you lose your sense of smell during COVID, you are going to have some oddities," Dr. Turner explained.
Right now, Dr. Turner says it's a wait and hope game.
The biggest day to day bummer with the loss of smell is a loss of joy as loss of health experts say a loss of smell affects your
"I am feeling depressed and annoyed because I can smell this terrible smell as soon as I enter a room," Brooker said.
"I can still eat
but right now it just isn't the same.
I want people to know that they are not alone.
That's how I feel sometimes.
"
Why the strange loss of smell?
If you're wondering why COVID-19 attacks the sense of smell, its complicated.
But the simple version is it appears that it cause inflammation at the top of your nose where you smell and then disconnects the connection between those smell nerves and your brain.
It's something doctors see with other viruses, not just the coronavirus.
Patients are advised to speak with their doctors if they are experiencing lingering COVID-19 symptoms.
The big question remains,
What can you do about it?
show that some therapies are working, like essential oils, that can help retrain your smell function.
It's something echoed by Dr, Turner.
"You can buy essential oils and smell them for 15 seconds a day twice a day, pungent oils like lavender, eucalyptus or lemon, you know what they are supposed to smell like, the idea is you might be able to help retrain your brain to speed up making those new connections again," Dr. Turner says.
Are you coping with with the loss of smell and taste?
Get reports like this and all the news of the day in Middle Tennessee delivered to your inbox each morning with the FOX 17 News Daily Newsletter:
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (WTVF) — Studies show most people recover from COVID-19 but there's also many who are still battling symptoms weeks, sometimes months later.
Now, there is a new way for long-haulers to get help here in Nashville.
Vanderbilt University Medical Center has started what's called the Adult Post-Acute COVID Clinic, a place where people who still have lingering symptoms can go for help.
In order to be admitted, a patient must have a tested positive for COVID-19 at least four to six weeks earlier.
Some of the most common symptoms people are experiencing long term can vary from fatigue, shortness of breath, cough, joint pain and chest pain.
In some rare cases, some can experience kidney problems, hair loss and even have trouble focusing.
SO, HOW DOES THIS WORK?
There's a number you can call that will connect you to a nurse, and your responses will determine if you need to see an internist or specialist either in person or virtually.
Since post-acute COVID syndrome can vary from person to person, the clinic has a team of specialists from a variety of fields to help best treat these lingering symptoms.
Anyone can call (888)-312-0847 seven days a week from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
Vanderbilt says you don't need a referral from a clinician.
You can call the clinic directly to talk with a nurse and schedule an appointment.
TORONTO --
According to a new study, for some COVID-19 patients, the very first sign of the virus attacking their system doesn’t come in the form of a cough or difficulty breathing but in something far deadlier: a stroke.
Scientists are learning more about the effects of COVID-19 on the body, and one of the more troubling and long-lasting concerns is a link to strokes.
A study published in the scientific journal Neurology on Tuesday collected data on 160 stroke patients with COVID-19, 29 of whom were under the age of 50.
When it came to these younger patients, 45 per cent had no risk factors for COVID-19, and in 50 per cent of the cases involving younger patients, suffering a stroke was their first symptom of COVID-19.
This means that half of the younger COVID-19 patients in the study displayed zero COVID-19 symptoms before the onset of a stroke.
“They’re totally healthy people who develop COVID-19 and they've got strokes,” Dr. Luciano Sposato, one of the researchers from Western University, told CTV News.
“That was quite surprising.”
The study is an alert to doctors and patients that during this pandemic, sometimes a stroke is more than it appears.
“When we see patients with stroke, the first thing that we need to keep in mind is that they are at very high risk of having COVID-19,” Sposato said.
Even in the absence of symptoms, they should be tested, he added, because stroke patients with COVID-19 are at a far higher risk of death when compared to stroke patients without COVID-19.
Up to 45 per cent of stroke patients in the ICU with COVID-19 don't survive, the study revealed, compared to the 15 to 30 per cent mortality rate of stroke patients without COVID-19 in the ICU.
When researchers looked at other factors, the death rate rose even higher.
The highest risk group in the study were those who had at least one significant comorbidity (meaning they also had another risk factor such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes, etc.) as well as severe COVID-19 symptoms.
Stroke patients in this group had a mortality rate of 59 per cent.
Compared to similar respiratory illnesses, COVID-19’s link to strokes was much stronger.
COVID-19 patients are ten times more likely than influenza patients to suffer a stroke, and more than twice as likely as SARS patients, according to the study.
Scientists believe that strokes linked to COVID-19 are different than the regular kind.
In these cases, scientists think the virus enters some cells that line the blood vessels, triggering inflammation and potentially causing blood clots to form in the lungs, the legs or the heart.
“There's something interesting about other comorbidities that these patients have, for example, if you look at clots in the pulmonary arteries, [they] are 14 times more frequent in patients with stroke and COVID-19 than with patients with stroke and no signs of COVID-19, based on historical data from Canada,” Sposato said.
These clots can even move to the brain.
This causes an ischemic stroke, where an artery blockage cuts off blood flow to the brain.
In this study, the number of patients who developed large clots in the arteries that specifically supply blood to the brain was much higher than previous studies of ischemic stroke patients who did not have COVID-19, with 49 per cent developing large clots versus 29 per cent in patients without COVID-19.
Surviving a stroke can have long-lasting impacts on the body as well.
Those who make it through can be left with problems speaking or walking.
“Stroke is the leading cause of major disability in North America, and anything that can increase the likelihood of having strokes, particularly in a younger population, [is] a public health priority and needs immediate attention,” Dr. Luciana Catanese, physician lead for hyperacute stroke services at Hamilton Health Sciences, told CTV News.
Standard stroke treatment and blood thinners appear to help these patients.
But fast medical attention is critical.
The warning signs for a stroke are sudden numbness, confusion, trouble speaking, vision loss and trouble walking.
“If you would experience any stroke symptoms, [please] feel safe to call 911, and to come to the hospital, because we have everything in place to provide safe and protected care during the COVID pandemic,” Dr. Aleksandra Pikula, a stroke neurologist with the Toronto Western Hospital, told CTV News.
The findings underline the extensive reach of COVID-19 within the body, and how it can impact other parts of a person’s health, with sometimes long-lasting consequences.
“We're not done with this disease and we're starting to see problems, not only in the lungs, but also in the brain and heart,” Sposato said.
In order to better understand the connection between strokes and COVID-19, Pikula and Catanese are co-leading a national study into the link.
The study will “be looking into the stroke complications of COVID,” Pikula said.
“We want to ultimately be able to understand this association and be able to understand, with a larger number of patients, what kind of patients do have strokes, what kind of strokes, and what are the ultimate causes of the stroke, so […] we’re better positioned to treat these strokes and improve the outcome of these patients,” Catanese added.
For people with depression, fueling your body with high-quality nutrition can literally help change your life for the better, according to a slew of studies.
“What you choose to put into your body will influence how you feel both physically and mentally,” says Leigh Merotto, a registered dietitian in private practice in Toronto.
“If you prioritize consuming enough plant-based foods, fruits and vegetables, and healthy fats, and eating regularly throughout the day, it can make a great difference in terms of your overall health and well-being.”
Not surprisingly, people who consistently eat healthy foods by, say, following the Mediterranean diet (which is centered on plant-based foods, olive oil, and heart-healthy omega-3 fatty acids from fish), enjoy better mental health than people whose diet is centered on red meat and processed foods high saturated fats, sodium, and added sugars.
That’s according to an article published in June 2020 in BMJ.
But nourishing your body when you’re depressed is often easier said than done, especially if you feel too low to prepare even one meal, or if you don’t have any appetite at all.
As Amy Gorin, a plant-based registered dietitian nutritionist in Stamford, Connecticut, explains, when you’re struggling with depression, it’s not uncommon to have no initiative to shop for food, prepare a meal, or clean up afterward.
“Some of the primary symptoms of depression — loss of motivation, poor concentration, difficulty sleeping, and low energy — can often result in someone not properly taking care of themselves in ways such as not showering, engaging in exercise, planning balanced meals, or cooking,” Merotto says.
The opposite can also be true, she adds.
Being depressed can cause people to eat more than usual to soothe their symptoms.
Often that means reaching for calorie-dense highly processed junk foods, sweets, and fried foods.
And because those foods lack high-quality nutrients, they can worsen depressive symptoms.
What’s more, eating a diet high in those types of pro-inflammatory foods — like breads, crackers, and cereals made with white flour, as well as desserts and beverages sweetened with sugar — is linked with depression, according to a review published in May 2019 in Frontiers in Nutrition.
With all that in mind, how can you eat a nutrient-rich diet when your mental and physical energy is low?
Here are six expert-recommended strategies.
RELATED:
The 10 Best Foods to Soothe Seasonal Depression
Infection by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which is the virus responsible for the present coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, causes a wide spectrum of symptoms.
Unfortunately, a minority of patients with COVID-19 require hospitalization due to progressive respiratory failure with a mortality rate of 20%.
Study: Impact of dexamethasone on persistent symptoms of COVID-19: an observational study.
Image Credit: Cryptographer / Shutterstock.com
*Important notice: medRxiv publishes preliminary scientific reports that are not peer-reviewed and, therefore, should not be regarded as conclusive, guide clinical practice/health-related behavior, or treated as established information.
Background
Many individuals who survived the acute phase of the infection were found to suffer from prolonged symptoms that are termed ‘long Covid’ or post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC).
A large randomized trial performed at United Kingdom (U.K.) hospitals throughout the pandemic indicated that the steroid dexamethasone was capable of reducing mortality in hospitalized patients who require oxygen.
Although dexamethasone is used widely, little is known about its impact on prolonged symptoms after patients have recovered from COVID-19.
A new study published on the preprint server medRxiv* assesses the symptom burden and quality of life of hospitalized patients eight months after recovering from COVID-19 by comparing the individuals before and after being treated with dexamethasone.
About the study
The current study recruited 198 patients who were admitted with COVID-19 pneumonia from a single hospital in the U.K. between April 2020 and August 2020.
The inclusion criteria were either a positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test against SARS-CoV-2 or a clinical-radiological diagnosis of COVID-19.
The patients who received steroid treatment two weeks before admission or those who were on long-term steroids were excluded from the study.
The eligible patients were divided into two groups including one group who received 6 milligrams (mg) of oral dexamethasone once daily and the control group.
Both groups consisted of patients with a similar age range, frailty score, presence of comorbidities, and requirement for ventilation during admission at baseline.
However, more men and a higher rate of prior chronic lung disease were reported in the control group that did not receive dexamethasone.
Patients who required oxygen following their admission were identified and grouped based on whether they have been prescribed dexamethasone upon admission.
The duration of the dexamethasone course was recorded, along with routine clinical and demographic information.
All patients were followed up for eight months after they had recovered from COVID-19 either by phone or in-person visits.
The patients were asked to complete a short survey that included questions on their quality of life and a review of ongoing symptoms.
Study findings
The results indicated that across the two groups, 68% of the patients reported at least one ongoing symptom eight months post-infection.
The most frequently reported symptoms were fatigue, insomnia, and breathlessness.
However, the patients receiving dexamethasone reported fewer symptoms as compared to the control group.
Symptoms at 8-month follow-up comparing dexamethasone group (orange) to no dexamethasone group (green).
The mental and physical composite scores extracted from the questionnaire indicated no significant difference between the dexamethasone and control groups.
However, there can be several implications of the result.
First, the patients receiving the steroid were most likely to recover, irrespective of the steroid used.
Second, the use of dexamethasone was increased during the pandemic; therefore, the dexamethasone group was recruited later than the control group.
Therefore, reduced symptomatology in the dexamethasone group could be due to general improvements in care that led to a reduction of long-term symptoms.
Third, the results could be due to more acute patients dying and not being available for follow-up.
Fourth, the association between dexamethasone and reduced mortality might be casual.
The current study had several limitations.
First, the sample size of the study was small and resulted in minimal data attrition.
Second, the study is limited to only those patients who required oxygen during hospitalization.
Third, the trial caused harm to hospitalized patients who did not require oxygen.
*Important notice: medRxiv publishes preliminary scientific reports that are not peer-reviewed and, therefore, should not be regarded as conclusive, guide clinical practice/health-related behavior, or treated as established information.
Late-Onset Alcohol Abuse Can Be a Presenting Symptom of Dementia, Researchers Find Clinical awareness of connection between alcohol and dementia is paramount to providing the best patient care management
Share
Patients who start abusing alcohol later in life—after age 40—may be doing so secondary to an underlying neurologic condition, such as frontotemporal dementia, according to findings by a team of researchers from the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and the University of California, San Francisco.
The results are reported in the April 4 issue of the Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease.
Overall alcohol abuse—classified as when alcohol consumption negatively impacts work or social life or leads to legal ramifications—is present in 1.7 percent of older adults in the United States.
Previous research has identified lifelong alcohol abuse as a risk factor for dementia.
However, it has been unknown whether older adults who begin abusing acohol late in life have an underlying neurodegenerative disease.
Particularly concerning is that people who begin abusing alcohol because of an underlying neurological condition may be misdiagnosed with primary alcohol abuse and referred to traditional addiction treatment programs, a process that may delay correct diagnosis and appropriate behavioral treatment, expend family resources, and add to patient and caregiver burden.
“Our study aimed to identify and compare the frequencies of lifetime alcohol abuse, late-onset alcohol abuse, and alcohol abuse as a first symptom of dementia in a group of patients living with several forms of dementia, including Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia,” said Georges Naasan, MD, Associate Professor of Neurology, and Medical Director for the Division of Behavioral Neurology and Neuropsychiatry, at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and senior author of the paper.
“What we found is that alcohol abuse may be the first sign of an underlying neurological condition when it presents late in life.
In fact, up to 7 percent (nearly 1 in 15) of patients with frontotemporal dementia started abusing alcohol late in life, and 5 percent (1 in 20) did so as the first symptom of the disease.
While it is important to identify social factors that may lead to alcohol abuse, such as retirement, loneliness, or loss of income/loved ones/housing, our data should implore health care workers to avoid systematically attributing alcohol abuse to these aspects and prompt clinicians to investigate the possibility of frontal lobe dysfunction.”
The research team conducted a cross-sectional, retrospective study of patients evaluated at an academic referral center between 1999 and 2017 who had a clinical diagnosis of behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), Alzheimer’s-type dementia, or semantic variant primary progressive aphasia.
The presence of alcohol abuse was screened using the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center UDS questionnaire completed by clinicians during patient research visits.
Lifelong alcohol abuse was defined as alcohol abuse that began before the patient was 40 years old, late-onset alcohol abuse as abuse that began at age 40 or above, and alcohol abuse as a first symptom of dementia as abuse that started within the first three years, either before or after symptom onset.
Among the 1,518 participants screened, late-onset alcohol abuse affected 2.2 percent, higher than the 1.7 percent for older adults overall.
The research team found that late-onset alcohol abuse was significantly more frequent in patients with bvFTD than those with Alzheimer’s-type dementia, while there was no difference between the frequency of lifelong alcohol abuse across the three dementia groups.
They also found that alcohol abuse as a first symptom occurred in 1.4 percent of all patients, five times more frequently in patients with bvFTD than those with Alzheimer’s-type dementia.
The results indicate not only that late-onset alcohol abuse is much more frequent in bvFTD than Alzheimer’s-type dementia, but also the likelihood that the biological mechanisms underlying late-onset and lifelong alcohol abuse are different.
“Because patients who begin using alcohol late in life are usually first seen by psychiatrists, primary care providers, and rehabilitation specialists, these professionals should be aware of the possibility that a neurodegenerative disease might be underlying the onset of alcohol abuse late in life in people who historically didn’t abuse alcohol.
Therefore, a specific evaluation including checking for other frontal lobe symptoms should be performed, and patients at risk should be referred to a neurologist,” said Dr. Naasan.
“An early and appropriate diagnosis in those patients is paramount for providing the best management, improving patients’ and families’ quality of life, and channeling patients to appropriate care facilities.”
Funding for this research was provided by the National Institutes of Health, The National Institute on Aging, and the Larry L. Hillblom Network Grant for the Prevention of Age-Associated Cognitive Declince.
About the Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease
Now in its 24th year of publication, the Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease (JAD) is an international multidisciplinary journal to facilitate progress in understanding the etiology, pathogenesis, epidemiology, genetics, behavior, treatment, and psychology of Alzheimer’s disease.
The journal publishes research reports, reviews, short communications, book reviews, and letters-to-the-editor.
Groundbreaking research that has appeared in the journal includes novel therapeutic targets, mechanisms of disease, and clinical trial outcomes.
JAD has a Journal Impact Factor of 4.472 according to Journal Citation Reports (Clarivate, 2020).
The journal is published by IOS Press.
j-alz.com
About IOS Press
IOS Press is headquartered in Amsterdam with satellite offices in the USA, Germany, India and China and serves the information needs of scientific and medical communities worldwide.
IOS Press now publishes more than 90 international peer-reviewed journals and about 70 book titles each year on subjects ranging from computer science, artificial intelligence, and engineering to medicine, neuroscience, and cancer research.
iospress.com.
We experience body pain from time to time and in most cases, it is due to exertion, stress, minor injuries or due to too much sitting.
These pains may last for a shorter or a bit longer duration and are usually cured with the help of medication or painkillers prescribed by doctors.
But what happens when your body pain persists over a longer period of time and accompanied by symptoms like weight loss, cough, fatigue etc.
One shouldn't ignore body pain if it recurs and becomes unbearable as it could be a sign of cancer.
Cancer is a group of diseases that occurs when abnormal cells grow uncontrollably or spread to other parts of the body.
It a leading cause of death worldwide, and accounted for nearly 10 million deaths in 2020, or nearly one in six deaths, according to WHO.
(Also read: Bengali actress Aindrila Sharma dies at 24; can cancer cause cardiac arrest?)
Cancer pain may be associated with other specific symptoms, such as loss of weight, loss of appetite, cough, haemoptysis, blood in the urine, and many other symptoms.(Freepik)
Body pain is considered to be the most common symptom in people associated from all age groups right from young age to elderly.
It is usually a result of exertion, sometimes trauma or other nonspecific causes.
Unlock exclusive access to the latest news on India's general elections, only on the HT App.
Download Now!
Download Now!
BODY PAINS THAT INDICATE CANCER
"Certain types of body pain can be associated with cancer and one should be very aware that this type of a body pain may be more serious.
In general, body pain associated with cancer will have 2 or 3 characteristic features," says Dr Prasad Kasbekar, Consultant Surgical Oncologist, Masina Hospital, Mumbai.
Dr Kasbekar lists the types of body pains that could indicate cancerous growth in the body.
PAIN THAT RETURNS WHEN YOU STOP MEDICATION
Such pain is usually long standing and relieved only with medications or specific treatment towards the pain.
The pain may recur when you stop the medication.
PAIN IS ACCOMPANIED WITH WORRYING SYMPTOMS
The pain may be associated with other specific symptoms, such as loss of weight, loss of appetite, cough, haemoptysis, blood in the urine, and many other symptoms.
BODY PAIN THAT'S LOCATED IN SPECIFIC PARTS WITH NO TRAUMA OR ILLNESS
Third and very important key feature is that such types of body aches associated with cancer are usually specially located in regions such as the back, or the upper abdomen near the liver, or in certain parts of the body like the bone.
There are no predisposing factors or history of any trauma or illness.
These kind of body aches if persistent should be thoroughly investigated as they may be the harbinger of an underlying cancer
"If you are getting persistent body pain, or specifically in a particular region of your body, then you should have it investigated, rather than just taking analgesics," says Dr Kasbekar.
COMMON CANCER SIGNS YOU SHOULDN'T IGNORE
Dr. Amit Bhargava Senior Consultant - Medical Oncology, Fortis Escorts Hospital, Faridabad says most of the cancers usually have no symptoms during the initial stages and only once they progress patients starts feeling the distress.
BRAIN TUMOUR SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
"Persistent headaches, giddiness, loss of consciousness and altered sensorium with loss of sensation or power in hands and legs, may be a sign of brain tumours," says Dr Bhargava.
HEAD AND NECK CANCER SIGNS
"Head and neck cancers are the ones which can be picked up at a very early stage as everything can be seen by a backed eye.
Any ulcer in the mouth, lump in the neck, hoarseness of voice, oral or nasal bleeds should not be ignored and evaluated to rule out cancer," says the expert.
LUNG CANCER SIGNS
Persistent cough, progressing breathlessness, chest pain or discomfort and blood in cough can be symptoms of lung cancer, says the oncologist.
BREAST CANCER SIGNS
"Any lump in the female or male breast, nipple discharge, dimpling or change in skin texture, lump in armpit can be a sign of breast cancer," says Dr Bhargava.
STOMACH CANCER SIGNS
Difficulty or pain while swallowing, unexplained weight loss, increasing weakness or lethargy or bloating after meal may be signs of food pipe or stomach cancers, according to Dr Bhargava.
LIVER OR GALL BLADDER CANCER SIGNS
"Abdominal pain, loss of appetite, increased acidity, any lump in abdomen or increasing size of liver and spleen can be due to liver, gall bladder and pancreatic cancers," says the oncologist.
COLON CANCER SIGNS
Difficulty in passing stools, blood in stools or mass in the mid or lowed abdomen can be due to colon cancer, says the expert.
PROSTATE AND BLADDER CANCER SIGNS
"Difficulty in passing urine or obstruction can be due to Prostate cancer.
Painless passing of blood in urine can be a symptom of urinary bladder cancer," says Dr Bhargava.
BLOOD CANCER SIGNS
"Increasing fatigue, unexplained fever or weight loss with loss in Haemoglobin or rising White cells or platelets can be some abnormalities due to blood cancer," says the expert.
Follow more stories on Facebook & Twitter
According to the researchers at UK's ZOE COVID Study, there has been a "sharp increase" in gastrointestinal symptoms including diarrhea, stomach pains and feeling sick, among people infected with the Omicron variant.
While the classic COVID-19 symptoms continue to include fever, fatigue and loss of smell and taste, experts believe that Omicron symptoms are slightly different.
That said, the two symptoms of COVID's Omicron variant that could come along while you eat are loss of appetite or skipping meals.
The ZOE symptoms study app had also highlighted appetite loss as one of an early sign of COVID last year.
Also read: Coronavirus symptoms: Pain in these two places could be sign of an Omicron infection
However, the organization says that skipping meals for a short period is not something to be very worried about.
“However, a continued loss of appetite in the elderly could be a sign of something wrong and should be raised with their GP or usual healthcare professional," it says.
The researchers add by saying, “It’s not necessary to force yourself to eat if you don’t feel like it
but it’s very important to keep drinking liquids to help replace the water lost as your body fights off the infection.”
CANCER SIGN The bizarre symptom you didn’t know was a sign of pancreatic cancer
GETTING 'butterflies' when you're nervous is pretty normal, but did you know a ‘fluttering’ sensation under your ribs could be a symptom of pancreatic cancer?
Around 10,500 people in the UK are diagnosed with the pancreatic cancer every year, according to Cancer Research UK, while the survival rate after 10 or more years is just 5 per cent.
2 Upper-abdominal pain can be a sign of pancreatic cancer - and some people have reported a 'fluttering' sensation beneath their ribs Credit: Getty
Those are upsetting stats, and yet, many of us still wouldn’t be able to list the possible signs or know what to look for.
To be fair, it can be tricky to diagnose.
Even the NHS notes on their website that, “pancreatic cancer may not have any symptoms, or they might be hard to spot.”
The vague symptoms also vary person to person, meaning knowing what to look out for can be tough.
Screening or early detection tests to help doctors diagnose the disease currently don’t exist either.
Now there’s renewed talk that a bizarre ‘fluttering sensation’ underneath your ribs could be a potential symptom.
ALL A-FLUTTER
The symptom was first touted as a potential sign in a 2014 BMJ report that referred to patients experiencing ‘pain’ and a sense of ‘fluttering’ beneath their ribs ahead of a pancreatic cancer diagnosis.
So is it a legit sign you should be alert to?
Lisa Woodrow, Pancreatic Cancer Specialist Nurse at Pancreatic Cancer UK, says: “We don’t frequently hear people talk about a fluttering sensation in their abdomen, but this could be related to digestive issues caused by the pancreas not working properly.
“Some people do talk about a gurgling sensation, and I wonder often if this is due to malabsorption of food due to insufficient pancreatic enzymes, thus this is often wind and digestion related.”
“Some patients will talk about a ‘pulling’ under their ribs,” she adds.
“Again, this is often related to digestive issues, or occasionally liver capsule pain when the disease has spread to the liver and this tissue is stretched causing discomfort.”
KNOW THE SIGNS
CEO and founder of Pancreatic Cancer Action, Ali Stunt, says that largely, “people are not aware of the symptoms of pancreatic cancers,” and this, combined with the fact “there are quite a lot of symptoms that are attributable to other diseases” means the disease can be misdiagnosed, or missed entirely.
Before her own diagnosis in 2007 aged 41, Ali herself was told she had a range of conditions - including muscle strain, irritable bowel syndrome, diabetes and gallstones.
She was even prescribed Buscopan and Gaviscon before an ultrasound and then a CT scan finally picked up a five centimetre mass on her pancreas.
Luckily for Ali, her tumour was caught just in time for surgery to be effective.
Not everyone is so fortunate.
“Only 10% of us are diagnosed in time to have surgeries to remove the tumour,” she says.
Ali’s symptoms included severe mid-back pain, where her bra strap sat, and upper-abdominal pain is one of the more common symptoms she says.
“It can be sort of underneath the ribcage and that can radiate round to the back as well.”
In terms of a “fluttering” sensation, she says she’s heard it mentioned, but didn’t experience it herself, and it could be related to that upper-abdominal pain some people suffer.
“People might have intermittent symptoms of this fluttering, so sometimes you'll get a bit of pain and then it might go away and you feel relieved, and then in a week or so it might be back,” says Ali.
“My advice to anybody who's got that kind of coming and going of symptoms - if that coming and going is persisting in itself, if it's not there constantly - then that's something I would urge people to seek help for.
“Obviously something is causing that.”
WHAT TO LOOK FOR Pancreatic Cancer UK recommends that anyone experiencing one or more of the most common symptoms, for more that four weeks, should contact their GP Most common symptoms: - back pain - indigestion - change in bowel habits - tummy pain - unexplained weight-loss Anyone with jaundice (yellowing of the eyes or skin) should immediately go to A&E. Find out more at: www.pancreaticcancer.org.uk
KEY SIGNS
Fatigue, unexplained weight loss and resistant dyspepsia can all be warning signs, as can new-onset diabetes, which Pancreatic Cancer Action are currently researching.
Jaundice is also one of the more noticeable symptoms, which can include “yellowing of the skin, and the whites of the eyes particularly”.
“People can get itchy because of the bile in the bloodstream, and also their urine can go dark, a bit like builder's tea,” explains Ali.
“There are lots of symptoms,” she continues.
“It's a question of joining up all the dots in terms of trying to get a diagnosis.”
She says it’s vital to speak to your GP as early as possible if you’re at all worried.
“This disease is so horrible,” says Ali, “but the earlier you seek help, the better your outcome is absolutely going to be.”
Her advice, if you’re concerned about your pancreatic health, is to “persevere” in getting answers - fluttering or not.
“If you've got symptoms that are not normal for you and they're not going away, or they've gone away and come back again, seek medical help,” she says.
“GPs are open and GPs will see you.”
Lisa agrees: “We do not want people to panic.
“Tthe symptoms of pancreatic cancer are typically vague and are common to many much less serious health conditions.
“However, pancreatic cancer has not gone away because of COVID-19 and I would urge anyone with persistent, unexplained symptoms to use the NHS.”
For more information visit Pancreatic Cancer Action at panact.org/symptoms or get in touch via enquiries@panact.org or 0303 404 0770.
Find out more at: www.pancreaticcancer.org.uk.
VA is on the front lines caring for Veterans and non-Veterans with a patient-centered holistic approach.
This includes caring for patients with Long COVID.
Here is vital information on signs and symptoms.
If you recognize any of these symptoms, tell your VA health care provider.
What is Long COVID?
Some people can have ongoing or new symptoms after having COVID-19 that do not go away or get worse over time.
If you have new or worsening symptoms 4-12 weeks after having COVID-19, you may be experiencing Long COVID.
Who can get Long COVID?
Anyone who has had COVID-19 can develop Long COVID, no matter how mild or severe their symptoms were.
At this time, it’s estimated that 4-7% of those diagnosed with COVID-19 will develop Long COVID.
My friend was diagnosed with Long COVID, but their symptoms are totally different than mine.
How can that be?
Long COVID affects everyone differently, as we all have different medical histories.
Because of that, not everyone with Long COVID will have the same symptoms.
I am a Veteran
and I think I may have Long COVID.
What do I do?
If you believe you have Long COVID, contact your care team today for an appointment.
How can I avoid getting Long COVID?
Unfortunately, the only way to avoid developing Long COVID is to not get sick with COVID-19.
The best ways to prevent getting sick with COVID-19 are vaccination and masking.
What is VA doing about Long COVID?
VA health care providers will use a Whole Health approach to caring for Veterans with Long COVID.
Whole Health focuses on what is most important to the Veteran, and uses all appropriate therapeutic approaches, health professionals, and disciplines working together to create a health plan that meets the needs of each individual Veteran.
This way, Veterans can take charge of their health and well-being.
Long COVID symptom checker
This is not a complete list of symptoms, and you may have more than one.
If you have any of these symptoms, use this list to tell your clinician or care team, on your next visit.
Altered sense of taste and/or smell No sense of taste or smell Tastes or smells “wrong”
Tiredness or fatigue that interferes with daily life Struggling to complete tasks you used to have no trouble doing, like playing with your kids, cleaning the house, cooking dinner
Symptoms that get worse after physical or mental activity Going for a walk Doing a crossword puzzle
Respiratory symptoms Ongoing cough Trouble catching your breath
Cardiac symptoms Heart racing, skipping beats Chest pain Palpitations Lightheadedness Dizziness Falling
Neurologic symptoms Brain fog Trouble remembering or focusing Memory problems Headaches Blurry vision
Mental health Anxiety Depression Feeling more stress Trouble sleeping
Digestive symptoms Abdominal pain Constipation
If you have any additional new symptoms, share them with your clinician.
Intervening with physical activity appears to mitigate depressive symptoms in children and adolescents, a systematic review and meta-analysis of almost 2,500 participants found.
Greater reductions were observed for children older than 13 years and those having a diagnosis of mental illness and/or depression versus other conditions, according to Hong Kong researchers reporting in JAMA Pediatrics.
Dr. Parco M. Sui
“There is an urgent need to explore novel treatment approaches that can be safely, feasibly, and widely implemented in the daily routine of depressed children and adolescents,” said study coauthor Parco M. Siu, PhD, exercise physiologist and associate professor in the school of public health at the University of Hong Kong, in an interview.
“Given the observed association with significant reductions in symptoms, clinical practice guidelines should consider the role of physical activity for improving the mental health of young populations.”
Dr. Siu further noted that while current guidelines suggest psychotherapy and/or pharmacotherapy for children with this common mood disorder, adherence to these can be problematic, and surveys show that nearly 80% do not receive appropriate disorder-specific medical care.
The analysis
Dr. Siu’s team drew on 21 international studies, including 17 randomized controlled trials, published from 1987 to 2021 and comprising 2,444 young participants, mean age 14, 53% girls.
Eligible studies compared the effect of exercise on depression versus a control condition.
In 12 studies, participants had a somatic or psychiatric disorder such as obesity, diabetes, depression, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
The mean duration of the prescribed physical activity program was 22 weeks (6-144 weeks), while the frequency of weekly sessions ranged from 2 to 5 days, with 3 days per week most common and mean duration of 50 minutes (30-120 minutes).
Regimens ranged from aerobic exercise on fitness equipment such as treadmills, stationary bikes, and ellipticals, to running, swimming, dancing, sports, and exercise games.
In meta-analysis of postintervention differences, physical activity was associated with a significant reduction in the pooled estimate of depressive symptoms compared with the control condition (Hedges g statistic [effect size] = −0.29; 95% confidence interval, −0.47 to −0.10; P = .004).
This was driven by moderate to large effect sizes in adolescents (g = −0.44) and children with diagnosed depression (g = −0.75).The differences, however, were not detectable after a mean follow-up of 21 weeks, possibly owing to the limited number of studies with follow-up outcomes, the authors conceded.
Despite the strong association, the mechanisms underlying the antidepressant properties of physical activity remain uncertain.
“Potential pathways include the activation of the endocannabinoid system to stimulate the release of endorphins, an increase in the bioavailability of brain neurotransmitters such as serotonin, dopamine, and noradrenaline, which are reduced in depression, as well as long-term changes in brain plasticity,” Dr. Siu said.
In addition, psychosocial and behavioral hypotheses suggest that physical activity can lead to improvements in self-perception, social interactions, and self-confidence.
However, he added, depressive phenomenology is multifaceted and individual, so isolating the effects that physical activity have on specific symptoms may not be possible.
Physical activity appears to enhance the treatment of cognitive and affective symptoms in depression, Dr. Siu continued, and a combination of physical activity and pharmacotherapy may also reduce relapse risk, improve adherence to antidepressants, and promote better management of adverse effects, compared with pharmacotherapy alone.
“More research is warranted to explain if and how these mechanisms moderate the effect of physical activity, and whether these changes are also present in younger populations,” he said.
Still unanswered is the question of how vigorous activity has to be in order to have an effect, Dr. Siu said.
“Future studies should investigate the influence of parameters such as frequency, duration, and supervision of exercise sessions to determine the optimal dose and mode of delivery of the intervention for depressive symptom management.”
But would group activity likely have broader benefits than solitary exercise?
“It is still unclear whether there’s a difference between the effect of solitary activities and team sports,” Dr. Siu said.
Dr. Eduardo E. Bustamante
In an accompanying editorial on the meta-analysis, Eduardo E. Bustamante, PhD, an exercise psychologist in the department of kinesiology and nutrition at the University of Illinois at Chicago, and colleagues called the meta-analysis “part of a potential watershed moment” in the field of exercise as therapy for psychological disorders.
“The work is timely, aligning with the rise of mental health disorders in adolescents, and the methods are rigorous (e.g., random-effects models, risk-of-bias assessment, sensitivity analyses).”
Dr. Bustamante said the literature on physical activity in children has lagged behind that for adults, so this meta-analysis provides a welcome “critical mass” of evidence of benefit in children, in an interview.
“Though the benefit is relatively small, it’s exciting to see the results come in positive specifically to depression.”
In his view, the effect of exercise is likely to be less pronounced in children than in adults, especially older ones, as they have fewer inflammatory and other systemic health problems that might improve with exercise.
“And we tend to see bigger effects in children with a diagnosis like ADHD or clinical depression.”
But the bottom line is clear: “The evidence that physical activity is effective medicine for mental health is robust; now we need to find ways to get people to take it.”
This work was supported by the Health and Medical Research Fund of the Food and Health Bureau, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Government, and the Seed Fund for Basic Research of the University of Hong Kong.
The authors and editorial commentators disclosed no conflicts of interest.
Something went wrong, please try again later.
Invalid email Something went wrong, please try again later.
Something went wrong, please try again later.
Covid Eris is beginning to see a rise in cases after a summer of relatively negligible impact from the coronavirus.
Eris - also known as E.G.5 has been found in more than 50 countries and has been classified a 'variant of interest' by the World Health Organization (WHO).
Eris is the fastest-growing subvariant, believed to be responsible for over 15% of cases when the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported earlier this month.
However, while hospitalizations are up in the US, the number is 90% below the levels reached in the peak of the pandemic in January 2022.
It comes as some people infected with the Eris strain are reporting an unpleasant symptom at night.
Luke O’Neill, Professor of biochemistry at Trinity College Dublin, said some people are reporting night sweats.
Read more: Pirola Covid symptoms to watch out for as new strain identified in the US
Read more: Biden administration to advise Americans to get Covid booster jab as variants cause concern
O'Neill told Newstalk Radio: "One extra symptom
[applicable to E.G.5]
I saw this morning is night sweats.
The disease is slightly different because the virus has changed.
There is some immunity to it, with the T cells and so on.
And that mix of your immune system and the virus being slightly different might give rise to a slightly different disease - with strangely enough - night sweats being a feature.
"
(Image: Getty Images)
Most common Covid Eris symptoms
The ZOE Covid Study app study reports the most common Covid symptoms among people with two or more doses of the vaccine.
According to the ZOE study, the main symptoms to look out for are similar to the heavily publicized Omicron symptoms:
Sore throat
Runny nose
Blocked nose
Sneezing
Dry cough
Headache
Wet cough
Hoarse voice
Muscle aches
Altered smell
Less common Covid symptoms
With the development of new Covid strains such as Eris, different symptoms have become more and less common respectively.
New research has shown that the symptoms that once were common - such as the loss of smell and taste - are becoming less common with Omicron variants.
Additionally, symptoms such as diarrhea, nausea, vomiting and other gastrointestinal problems are beginning to wane.
For the latest local news and features on Irish America, visit our homepage here.
Despite an early start to summer weather, the City of Toronto revealed it has some 245 water fountains that aren't turned on, something an urban planning advocate says spells a bigger problem for those who rely on public amenities.
Mayor John Tory revealed Tuesday only 60 per cent of the city's 700 public water fountains were up and running during recent record-breaking heat spells.
The city faced online backlash in a flood of comments and replies, particularly after it advised residents to stay hydrated using public fountains across Toronto when many weren't open.
It's going to be a hot one today, Toronto!
When you go out, make sure you stay hydrated.
Use a reusable water bottle & fill up with cool, refreshing <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/CityOfTO?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#CityOfTO</a> tap water: <a href="https://t.co/S1wKa6bjuj">https://t.co/S1wKa6bjuj</a> <a href="https://t.co/ZKI3RWCVmp">pic.twitter.com/ZKI3RWCVmp</a> —@cityoftoronto
Harbourfront resident Joy Van Kleef said she carries a water bottle with her every day when she takes her dog for a walk, a habit she picked up during the COVID-19 pandemic.
"The water supply in some of the parks that we used to rely on aren't operating," Van Kleef said.
"It means we have to always bring water with us, no matter how long or short we're going to be out.
"
Van Kleef says while inconvenient, she tries not to focus on the problem and instead enjoy the amenities that are available.
'It's really an equity issue'
But an urban planning advocate says the lack of running water fountains is a symptom of a gradual lowering of standards that, if left unchecked, will lead to inequitable spaces that are unbecoming of a city like Toronto.
"If we compare ourselves with cities with similar income and similar weather like Copenhagen or like Paris or Barcelona or Melbourne ...
it does not happen in those cities," says Gil Penalosa, founder and CEO of non-profit 8 80 Cities, which aims to improve the quality of life for people in urban centres.
"We need to understand that management is not just picking up the garbage and cutting their grass, but it's about the uses and the activities.
"
In an email to CBC News, the city says factors like weather, water testing, and the age, size and location of the pipes, can make the process of getting water fountains working last anywhere from a few hours to a few days to complete.
Terence Hamilton is one of the Toronto residents who took to social media to express his displeasure with the city.
He told CBC's Metro Morning Thursday that the people who suffer the most are families with children, people with disabilities and those experiencing homelessness.
"It really is not about me being thirsty on a hot day.
It's really an equity issue," says Hamilton.
The problem of equitable public spaces popped up as recently as the summer of 2021, when residents spending time outside found the seasonal washrooms at many public parks were closed.
Similarly, the city faced backlash last year for waiting until early June to start ramping up the opening of public water fountains.
Pelanosa says instead of aiming to turn on the taps and open washrooms on time every summer, the city should work to keep amenities open year-round to keep sustainability, equity and health at the forefront of public space management.
"[To] the people that do not have a cottage, that are not going to other places and that are staying, and many living in buildings and condos, their parks are the gardens of their homes," Pelanosa said.
The city said that as of Thursday, over 65 per cent of public water fountains are running, and all are expected to be available by mid-June.
All 142 seasonal washrooms in parks were opened by the Victoria Day weekend unless the washroom required more complex maintenance or repairs.
There will also be up to 50 portable toilets with sinks rolled out to parks with encampments "as needed" throughout the summer.
The city also confirmed that almost all of the city-owned spray and splash pads are open, except for a "handful" closed for capital construction or temporary mechanical issues.
Toronto's splash and spray pads will operate daily from 9 a.m. to 8:30 p.m. until Sept. 18.
(City of Toronto)
Toronto has 58 outdoor pools and a water park,10 of which will open early on June 18 on a partial schedule with remaining locations opening in late June.
The city will also be activating its Heat Relief Network strategy to help residents stay safe during heat warnings.
The network is made up of more than 300 cool spaces throughout the city, and includes shelters and 24-hour respite sites that are available to individuals experiencing homelessness.
Please click here to view our site optimised for your device.
The Swedish National Parkinson Register, PARKreg
The Swedish National registry for Parkinson’s Disease (PARKreg), which was established in 2011 with the aim to contribute to Swedish Parkinson care through continuous follow-up of clinical measures and HRQoL instruments in clinical practice and through research.
The register includes demographic variables, diagnosis, treatments, and physician reported clinical measures of disease severity, and patient reported outcomes.
Information is included per clinical practice when the patients visit the doctor/nurse at the neurologist’s office, which is at least once a year.
Due to the longitudinal nature of the study, patients were not necessarily assessed by the same neurologist at all visits.
The registry currently covers at least one registration in approximately 6800 patients out of approximately 22 000 patients with Parkinson´s disease in Sweden.
This study is based on data on patients from the southernmost region of Sweden, Scania, with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease in PARKreg that was retrieved in April 2020.
The Scania Cohort of PARKreg has an estimated coverage of approximately 50% of patients diagnosed with PD in the region.
Included patients were required to have at least one valid assessment of one of the study outcomes apart from treatment variables.
Treatment data
Data on prescriptions and pick-ups of treatment was linked to the PARKreg Cohort by a unique personal identification number using data from the Swedish Prescribed Drug Register, maintained by the National Board of Health and Welfare.
Medications in the register had associated defined daily dose data that describe the assumed average maintenance dose per day for the medication when used for its main indication in adults.
Daily doses were calculated as the number of defined daily doses picked up divided by pick up frequency (i.e. a patient picking up a prescription with a total of 7 defined daily doses every week would be assigned a daily dose of 1).
Levodopa prescriptions were considered any prescription with ATC code in the category N04BA Dopa and dopa derivatives.
Average daily levodopa dose was computed for each half year between first and last registered pick up.
Daily dose at any time was computed by linear interpolation of the half-yearly average doses.
Before first registered pick up, the dose was set to 0.
After the last half-year mark before the last pick up, daily doses were set to the last average half-yearly dose until all subsequent picked-up doses would run out, and after that the daily dose was set to 0.
Average Levodopa Equivalent Daily Dose (LEDD) of all prescribed medications was computed for each patient.
This computation was done following the above description for average daily levodopa dose where for prescriptions outside of N04BA, conversion factors from the Parkinson's Measurement Levodopa Equivalent Dose Calculator13 were used to convert to the LEDD scale.
Current and former (ever or last 6 months) treatments with drugs in any direct sub-categories of ATC code N04B DOPAMINERGIC AGENTS were included as outcomes.
If a sub-category contained at least two individual drugs that each had more than 10.000 registered pickups, each of these drugs were also included as separate outcomes.
Study variables and outcomes
The study examined different time variables and their relation to PD progression.
The five main time variables considered were age at PD onset, age at PD diagnosis, age at baseline, years since PD onset, and years since PD diagnosis.
PD onset was defined as self-reported onset of motor symptoms while time variables related to age and diagnosis were defined based on central registers.
This study included symptom-based outcomes, HRQoL outcomes, and treatment outcomes.
The symptom-based outcomes were investigated using the following scales; Clinical Impression of Severity Index for Parkinson's Disease (CISI‐PD)14 (six-item scale (0–6) with a total score ranging from 0–36, with higher scores indicating higher levels of disability), Modified Hoehn & Yahr staging (H&Y)5,15 (seven categories ranging from 0.0–5.0 with higher scores indicating higher levels of disability) and Non-Motor Symptom Questionnaire (NMSQ)16 (30-item scale with a total score ranging from 0–30 with higher scores indicating higher non-motor symptom load).
In addition, dystonia and daily dystonia time were evaluated along with freezing of gait and off fluctuations.
The HRQoL outcomes were investigated using the Eight-item Parkinson’s Disease Questionnaire (PDQ-8)17 and the EQ-5D-3 level version (EQ-5D-3L), including the EQ-5D-3L visual analogue scale (VAS)18.
Treatment outcomes (such as active prescriptions and doses) were extracted using data on filled prescriptions.
The treatment outcomes included average daily levodopa dose, averaged LEDD and number of different dopaminergic agents (ATC prefix N04B)
the patient had been exposed to (last 6 months/ever) at a given visit.
Current or former use of individual drugs or drug types within the group of dopaminergic agents were also considered as outcomes at baseline following the convention described in the previous section.
A detailed description of the outcomes scales is available in the Supplementary material.
Statistical analysis
Spearman correlations were used to evaluate the relation between symptom scores and scale components at baseline and the five considered time variables, age at PD onset, age at PD diagnosis, age at baseline, years since PD onset, and years since PD diagnosis.
Years on dopaminergic treatment were highly correlated with years since PD diagnosis, correlation coefficient 0.83, and thus not further included in the analyses.
Longitudinal trajectories of outcomes were analyzed using linear mixed-effects models.
The models all assume that unobserved data is missing at random.
Outcome trajectories were modeled by fixed-effect natural splines over both age and time since onset.
For each model, the degrees of freedom for each spline basis (between 1 and 5) were selected using the Schwarz Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC).
All models had a random intercept, slope and second-order polynomial term in time since baseline describing the within-patient time variation.
A free covariance structure between the random coefficients was assumed.
For each outcome, four distinct models of the temporal evolution of outcomes were considered and the one with the lowest BIC was selected as the final model.
The first model only included effects of age, the second model only included effects of time since onset, the third model included additive effects of age and time since onset, and the fourth model included interactions between age and time since onset.
The interpretation of the first and second models is that the outcomes are not affected by disease progression and age, respectively.
The interpretation of the third model (additive) is that aging and disease progression affect outcomes independently, while the interpretation of the fourth model (interaction) is that the outcome is affected synergistically by an interactions between aging and disease progression that give rise to different outcomes than what one would expect from the individual estimated contributions.
All statistical analyses were done using R 4.0.219.
Mixed-effects models were fit using the lme4 package20.
Ethics
The study was conducted in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration.
Participants in the Parkinson registry are included after giving their informed consent.
All participants were able to withdraw from the registry at any point in time.
This study was approved by the Swedish Ethical Review Authority on 4. Feb 2020 (Decision number 2019-05791).
Leer en español
This story is part of a collaborative reporting initiative between the Midwest Center for Investigative Reporting and USA TODAY Network and is supported by the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting.
In April, despite his fever, a meatpacking worker continued to carve neck bones out of pig carcasses at a JBS plant in Iowa.
Two weeks later, he would test positive for COVID-19.
But in the meantime, he said, he kept clocking in because of a punitive attendance system widely used in meatpacking plants: the point system.
Under the policy, workers usually receive a point or points for missing a day.
If they gain enough points, they’re fired.
For a few months earlier this year, as case counts swelled, Tyson Foods suspended its point system, and Smithfield Foods said it has halted its version for the time being.
However, the point system has endured at Tyson and JBS plants throughout the pandemic, and it has continued to coerce people with potential COVID-19 symptoms into showing up to work, said plant employees, their family members, activists and researchers.
“People are afraid now to lose points, and they start to go to work even when they’re sick,” Alfredo, a machine operator in a Tyson poultry plant in Arkansas, said through an interpreter.
He asked to be identified only by his first name out of fear of retribution.
“If they see that you can walk, they’ll tell you to keep working,” he continued.
“If you can’t stand on your own, they’ll send you home.”
Spokespeople for the country’s two biggest meat processing companies said employees are encouraged to stay home while ill.
“Our current attendance policy encourages our people to come to work when they’re healthy and instructs them to stay home with pay if they have symptoms of COVID-19 or have tested positive for the virus,” Tyson spokesman Gary Mickelson said.
“Regardless of our attendance policy, at no point during the pandemic have we assessed attendance points against team members for absences due to documented illness,” JBS spokeswoman Nikki Richardson said.
[Read more: Cheap chicken, beef came at a cost.
How American meat plants bred coronavirus hot spots.
]
Still, the point system has likely contributed to the virus’s spread, said Jose Oliva, co-founder of the HEAL Food Alliance, a non-profit that organizes food industry workers.
“It’s probably one of the better propagators for the coronavirus that we’ve seen,” he said.
“It’s absolutely disastrous to have a point system in the midst of a pandemic.”
Workers at one Tyson plant and two JBS plants said the only way they can stay home without penalty is if they test positive for the disease.
They are required to go to work if they’re waiting for test results, they said.
Once he tested positive, the Iowa worker, 50, was allowed to miss work without racking up points, he said.
He requested anonymity because he fears losing his job.
Complicating the situation is that many workers struggle to access testing or avoid COVID-19 tests due to the cost, wait times and fear of being targeted by immigration authorities, workers and advocates said.
The point system varies from plant to plant.
At the JBS plant in Greeley, Colorado, where about 300 workers have contracted the virus, employees can rack up six points before they’re fired, according to a document shared by the local chapter of the United Food and Commercial Workers union.
At a JBS plant in Marshalltown, Iowa, it’s seven points, and at a Tyson poultry plant in Arkansas, where hundreds of workers have fallen ill, it’s 14 points, according to screenshots and photos shared by meatpacking workers in those plants.
At the Tyson plant, the company’s general attendance policy notes that “approval of prearranged absences is based upon the business needs of the Company.”
Even if workers give the plant proper notification that they’ll miss a day, they receive a point, according to a copy of the attendance policy.
(Read the whole attendance policy at the end of this article.)
Mickelson said the document did not accurately reflect the company’s attendance policy during the pandemic, as workers have been encouraged to remain home if they’re sick.
The point system’s enforcement can also depend on the supervisor.
They can bend the rules for employees with whom they have a good relationship, workers said.
While requiring employees to wear masks and installing plastic barriers between workers can reduce the transmission of the virus, the disease will keep spreading if plants don’t isolate and quarantine sick workers, said Shelly Schwedhelm, executive director of emergency management and biopreparedness at the University of Nebraska Medical Center.
To curb the virus’s spread, “get rid of the point system and don’t deter people from calling in ill,” she said.
After the Iowa meatpacking worker tested positive, he stayed home for two weeks before returning to the plant.
During the day, he did jumping jacks in his basement in hopes of strengthening his body enough to fight the virus and recited gasping prayers over the phone with his pastor.
At night, he walked alone through his deserted neighborhood, worried he wouldn’t wake up again if he fell asleep.
He said the company is “making us go back to work because some damn hogs got to die.
But they don’t care about human life.
They care more about the damn hogs than they do about people.”
New system for the pandemic
Before the pandemic, the JBS plant in Greeley allowed 7.5 points before a firing.
Now, it’s six, said Kim Cordova, president of UFCW Local 7, the union that represents the plant’s 3,000 workers.
“The attendance policy became even more restrictive,” she said.
Six workers died at the plant, making it one of the deadliest publicly reported meatpacking plant outbreaks in the country, according to Midwest Center tracking.
Sick employees can only recoup points at the Greeley plant if they have a doctor’s note and if they call into an English-only attendance hotline, a problem for a workforce that speaks more than 38 languages, Cordova said.
To remove points from their record, workers must submit to the union screenshots of their call history to the hotline.
Many workers find it to be a convoluted process, Cordova said.
“They’ll give the point, and then the worker has to fight to have it removed,” she said.
“They make it really difficult to call in while sick, so workers are compelled to come into work even if they’re symptomatic.”
Richardson, JBS’s spokeswoman, said their new point system is more forgiving now because it allows workers to miss multiple days in a row.
The company reset all its employees’ points to zero in late July, she said.
Tyson temporarily relaxed its point system in March but brought it back in June, even as case counts swelled.
Tyson Fresh Meats plant in Waterloo, Ia., on Sept. 17, 2020.Photo by Kelly Wenzel for The Midwest Center for Investigative Reporting.
The timing of Tyson’s decision was no coincidence, said Don Stull, a professor at the University of Kansas who has researched meatpacking for 35 years.
“As that initial attention being focused on the industry began to wane, they started trying to run as near to pre-pandemic levels as they could.
So they needed as many workers as they could get,” he said.
Mickelson, Tyson’s spokesman, said Stull’s claim was not true.
Few other opportunities
Large meatpacking plants are often in rural areas without many jobs opportunities.
That leaves workers in a bind when dealing with the point system, workers and advocates said.
[Read more: Arkansas poultry plants are struggling with COVID-19.
Hispanic workers are facing the worst of it.]
Eric Lopez, a sales manager at U.S. Cellular, said his mother works at the JBS plant in Marshalltown.
A Mexican immigrant with no formal education who doesn’t speak English, she had few jobs available to her in Marshalltown other than the pork plant, he said.
She knows people with symptoms have continued showing up to work, he said, and it’s caused her to break down after coming home from work because she fears catching the virus.
For decades, the meatpacking industry has relied on immigrant, minority and poor workers, a demographic that activists and researchers said the primarily white meatpacking executives have exploited.
“Companies are run by old, white guys who think of workers as a piece of machinery,” said Joe Henry, the political director for the League of United Latin American Citizens of Iowa, a Hispanic civil rights organization.
“They see them as people with different skin colors and different languages that they can just go ahead and treat like animals.”
Tyson and JBS strongly denied this characterization.
“That is completely untrue,” said JBS’s Richardson, whose response echoed Tyson’s.
“We have done everything possible to both protect and support our team members during this challenging time.”
Tyson Attendance Policy
Tyson Attendance Policy (PDF)
Tyson Attendance Policy (Text)
Frank Hernandez of the Midwest Center for Investigative Reporting contributed to this story.
Type of work:
Republish This Story Republish our articles for free, online or in print.
People who are genetically more likely to be active in the morning have a lower risk of experiencing symptoms of depression than those who are in their element in the evenings
Jogging at sunrise suggests you might be an early bird rather than
a night owl Lisa Maree Williams/Getty Images
Being genetically predisposed to be more active in the morning than the evening may reduce your risk of experiencing symptoms of depression, such as having low energy or struggling to make decisions.
Researchers have previously found that night owls may be at greater risk of having symptoms of depression than early birds.
But it is unclear whether staying up late increases the risk of getting such symptoms or if the symptoms tend to lead people…
Editor's note: UK is the world's 6th largest economy, yet its second largest city declared bankruptcy.
What went wrong with Birmingham?
Will it have a ripple effect across the West?
Here's our interview with John Ross, senior fellow at Chongyang Institute for Financial Studies at Renmin University of China.
The views expressed here are his own and not necessarily those of CGTN.
Edited excerpt:
CGTN: And speaking of problems in the Western economies, I just have to ask you this question about an incident that took place in your home country.
Birmingham, Britain's second largest city, has declared itself bankrupt, basically, and it has stopped all nonessential spendings.
So, what happened?
I mean, Britain is the world's 6th largest economy.
What went wrong here?
John Ross:
Well, because this is quite a long story, we have to go right back to the election of the Conservative and Liberal government way back in time about more than 10 years ago.
They embarked on policies of austerity which have been totally unsuccessful economically.
The economy is growing very slowly.
Then you had the very, very big setback of Brexit, which was completely irrational from the point of the economy, leaving the European Union, Britain's largest market, which did damage to the economy.
Therefore, the economy has been growing very, very slowly.
And therefore, you've got a situation which is a great deal of strain on all the finances of major cities in Britain, and Birmingham happens to be the one which is worst of all and therefore it's gone bankrupt.
But it's not the only city economy in Britain which is facing economic problems at this time.
It's a symptom rather than being something totally unique and special.
Of course, it has some specific features, which is what made it the worst, but it's going to be set against the very bad performance of the UK economy.
CGTN:
Since you talked about the global slowdown, I just want to ask you: Is this bankruptcy going to have a ripple effect across the Western world?
You talked about it, there's a slowdown in the economic development of the developed countries.
Are we going to see matters get worse?
And what should we do about it?
John Ross: No, Birmingham by itself is not going to have a ripple effect.
It's too small.
Birmingham is a symptom rather than the cause of this problem.
Much more serious, for example, was in the United States, this year, we've had two out of the three biggest bank collapses in U.S. economic history, and that's got a much bigger effect than Birmingham.
The problem is, the very slow growth has put in all sorts of strain into the financial system of many countries.
In addition to the bank collapses in the United States, in Europe, we have almost no growth.
The fastest growing economy in Europe over the last four years, that’s Italy.
It has only grown by 1.5 percent, which means it’s almost close to stagnation.
And the other European economies are doing worse.
As to what the developing countries have got to deal with this, they will become less dependent and need to become less dependent on what happens in the developed countries.
That's the importance of the Belt and Road Initiative.
That's the importance of BRICS.
There is already a tendency in the world economies for the developing countries to go more rapidly, to grow more rapidly than the developed economies.
And this is going to strengthen.
So, strengthening South-South ties is the most important thing for developing countries to do.
(If you want to contribute and have specific expertise, please contact us at opinions@cgtn.com.
Follow @thouse_opinions on Twitter to discover the latest commentaries in the CGTN Opinion Section.)
A new study from clinicians at the University of California-Los Angeles (UCLA) offers more insight into the mental and physical components of long COVID, suggesting that people who perceived having more cognitive difficulties during their acute COVID-19 illnesses—including "brain fog," anxiety, and depression—were more likely to later report the lingering physical symptoms that define long COVID-19.
The authors of the study, which appeared in JAMA Network Open late last week, said the findings came from data collected for clinical purposes from 766 patients enrolled in UCLA's SARS-CoV-2 Ambulatory Program.
The program was started to follow up on patients who had either been hospitalized for COVID-19 at UCLA or seen as an outpatient at 1 of 20 associated clinics from April 2020 to February 2021.
Clinicians interviewed patients about symptoms by telephone at 30 days, 60 days, and 90 days following hospital discharge or, in the case of outpatients, after the date of a positive COVID-19 test.
The average age of participants was 60 years, and 52.1% were men.
All questions were meant to gauge if a patient was back to pre-COVID health, physically and mentally.
Cognitive difficulties tied to twice the risk of long COVID
Patients were asked about nine symptom clusters during the previous 4 weeks: fever, chills or night sweats; loss of smell or taste; fatigue; shortness of breath; chest pain; numbness or tingling; nausea, vomiting or diarrhea; muscle aches; and rash.
They were also asked three questions to assess cognitive function: Could the patients get organized?
Could they concentrate on a television show or while reading book?
And had they forgotten what was discussed during a telephone call within the previous month?
The researchers found that 276 (36.1%) of the patients surveyed within 4 weeks of hospital discharge or infection perceived that they had cognitive difficulties.
Of the 276 patients (36.1%) who perceived a cognitive deficit, 63 patients (22.8%) responded yes to only 1 item, 53 patients (19.2%) responded yes to 2 items, and 160 patients (58.0%) responded yes all 3 items.
And these 276 patients were twice as likely to report also experiencing physical symptoms at 60 and 90 days indicative of long COVID.
A total of 118 of 276 patients (42.8%) described long COVID symptoms during follow up, compared with 105 of 490 patients (21.4%) who did not report cognitive difficulties in the first 4 weeks following infection.
Key role of anxiety, depression
Neil Wenger, MD, MPH, senior study author, told CIDRAP News that answers to these questions about perceived cognitive struggles were not associated with cognitive defects as strongly as the presence of anxiety and depression were.
Study data showed that 109 patients (14.2%) had a history of cognitive difficulties before COVID, 153 patients (20.0%) had a diagnosis of depression, and 213 patients (27.8%) had a diagnosis of anxiety.
Wenger is a professor in the Division of General Internal Medicine and Health Services Research at UCLA.
It turns out, anxiety and depression symptoms during the acute phase of COVID are most predictive of developing long COVID symptoms.
"It turns out, anxiety and depression symptoms during the acute phase of COVID are most predictive of developing long COVID symptoms," he said.
"We thought this is a really important finding, as the world is trying to figure out what is long COVID, what are the predictors?
And it seems like we are tapping into one part of the condition.
"
Wenger was careful to explain that the findings were not conclusive, and they do little to explain how and why long COVID develops.
Are people with anxiety and depression experiencing a level of brain inflammation that makes them susceptible to long COVID?
Or are they more likely to look for lingering symptoms?
"Nobody knows," said Wenger.
"But as a clinician, if I see someone with brain fog in the acute stage of COVID, I am going to be attentive to following up with them, because it seems these people are at risk for developing long COVID.
"
Wegner also said the observations from the ambulatory clinic can, at best, provide a clue to researchers about where to go next in understanding long COVID.
Kindergarteners get their temperatures checked as they return to school in Riverside.
A new study questions the value of this type of screening, since most kids with coronavirus infections don’t develop a fever.
If you’ve taken your child to school, a dental appointment or a sports practice in the past year, you’ve probably seen someone hold a thermometer up to their forehead or wrist as a COVID-19 screening tool.
But a new study suggests that a temperature reading in the normal range isn’t a reliable signal that a kid is coronavirus-free.
In fact, the study of more than 12,000 children with laboratory-confirmed infections found that the vast majority of them — more than 81% — did not develop a fever despite contracting the coronavirus.
What’s more, nearly three-quarters of these infected children never had “any of the typical COVID-19 symptoms” — a fever, cough or shortness of breath — researchers wrote Thursday in the journal Scientific Reports.
Advertisement
On the one hand, the low rate of symptoms in people with bona fide infections is something to be grateful for.
But on the other hand, it means that identifying children who could be spreading the virus will be more difficult than previously thought.
“Routine screening tools and procedures such as daily temperature checks in school may be less effective,” the study authors wrote.
Instead, “innovative” screening methods and “frequent testing” will be required to identify potential disease spreaders.
Estimates of the number of U.S. children who have been infected by the coronavirus vary.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention pegs it at just under 3.2 million since the start of the pandemic, while the American Academy of Pediatrics says it’s more than 3.8 million and the COVKID project puts it above 4.5 million.
Whatever the figure, children have always accounted for a minority of coronavirus cases.
Though Americans under the age of 18 account for 19.3% of the U.S. population, they’re responsible for only 12.3% of the country’s infections and less than 0.2% of its COVID-19 deaths.
Those figures reflect the fact that COVID-19 is different in kids than in adults.
The new study backs that up.
The data come from the electronic medical records of 33 healthcare organizations around the country that participate in the TriNetX Research Network.
The records included 12,306 laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19 that were diagnosed in patients under the age of 18 between April 1 and Oct. 31 last year.
Perhaps the most striking finding was how few of those patients had symptoms typically associated with COVID-19.
Advertisement
Although it’s primarily considered a respiratory disease, only 16.5% of the pediatric patients had respiratory problems, such as shortness of breath, a cough or wheezing.
In adults, symptoms like fevers, muscle and joint pain, and a general feeling of malaise are also associated with COVID-19, as is the loss of smell or taste.
Yet only 18.8% of the kids reported at least one of these symptoms.
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and other gastrointestinal problems cropped up in 13.9% of the young patients, while skin rashes, conjunctivitis and other dermatological symptoms affected 8.1%.
Neurological ailments like headaches and convulsions occurred in just 4.8% of the children.
Most symptoms were more common among the 5.5% of patients who required hospital treatment than in the 94.5% who did not.
The two exceptions were headache and disturbances of smell or taste.
Of the hospitalized patients, 17.6% (or 118 children) needed critical care and 4.1% (or 38 children) were put on ventilators.
It’s not clear exactly how many died, but it was no more than 10.
(Data on deaths was obscured for privacy reasons, the study authors wrote.)
There were some things the children with COVID-19 did have in common with adults.
Compared with white children in the study, Black children were about twice as likely to be admitted to a hospital, and the risk for Latino children was about 31% higher.
The odds of needing critical care or mechanical assistance with breathing were about the same for all three groups.
Advertisement
The reasons for these disparities are not clear, but the study authors speculated that socioeconomic forces saddled Black and Latino children with more indirect exposure to the virus — perhaps because they were more likely to live with an essential worker, or they didn’t have enough space at home to fully isolate from a family member who was ill.
Regardless of race or ethnicity, most children in the study did not develop symptoms that would have made their coronavirus infections clear to others.
That means adults will need to rethink their screening strategies if they want to spot these kids before they spread the virus to others.
Conducting random testing more often would help, the study authors wrote.
So would focusing more screening tests on children from higher-risk households, or on kids with medical conditions that put them at greater risk of serious disease if they become infected.
It’ll be more complicated than aiming a thermometer at a kid’s forehead or asking them if they’ve got a cough, but the work must be done.
“The reopening of schools underlines the importance of understanding the epidemiology of pediatric COVID-19 infections,” the researchers wrote.
Menopausal symptoms are unique abnormal symptoms in women and important factors affecting women’s physical and mental health and living standards.
We found that the incidence of menopausal-related symptoms in women who underwent physical examinations was high, but to a lesser extent; this was basically consistent with the results of Ding et al.
[20] study carried out in nurses but slightly lower than the results of Huang et al.
[18] survey carried out in menopausal clinics in Shanghai, which may be related to different cultural backgrounds, economic levels, and populations selected for the survey.
The occurrence of menopausal symptoms differs in women in different regions: surveys in Cambodia have found that the most prevalent menopausal symptom is fatigue
[21].
A study carried out in Zhejiang found that bone and joint pain is the most common symptom in menopausal women
[22].
Hot flashes, insomnia, bone and joint pain, mood swings, and palpitations are the reasons why Chinese women seek medical treatment [23], while in Western countries, vasomotor symptoms (e.g., hot flashes and sweating) are the most common symptoms in menopausal women and one of the most important reasons women seek medical treatment [24].
In addition, a study in the United States noted that hot flashes lasted for an average of 7.4 years in women [3].
In this survey, the top five menopausal symptoms were insomnia, fatigue, bone and joint pain, sexual dysfunction, and emotional instability.
It is suggested that medical staff should pay attention to symptoms with higher incidence and implement targeted coping strategies in combination with the characteristics of each region.
We analysed the influencing factors of menopausal symptoms and found that women living in urban areas, with a positive mentality, a high sexual intercourse frequency, and regular physical exercise had a lower incidence of menopausal-related symptoms, which was consistent with the findings of Wang [25] and AN
[26].
Women living in rural areas have fewer opportunities to receive menopause-related health education, have less understanding of the menopausal period, and cannot seek medical attention in a timely manner when menopausal symptoms occur, which in turn increases the possibility of menopausal symptoms [27].
In addition, maintaining a good mentality during the menopausal period is an important factor in reducing the occurrence of menopausal syndrome.
The more positive the attitudes of women towards the menopausal period, the more likely they are to actively seek help from others to obtain more mental and material support after the onset of menopausal symptoms, and the more able they are to cope with the physical and mental changes brought about by the menopausal period.
Physical exercise is a promoting factor for women to maintain their physical health and plays an important role in preventing and improving menopausal symptoms [28].
Regular physical exercise can improve sleep quality, help to maintain a good mood, and prevent obesity and has a positive effect on reducing the occurrence of menopausal symptoms in women.
Studies have shown that there is a positive and significant relationship between menopausal symptoms and social support, and menopausal symptoms decrease with increasing social support [29].
Spousal support is an important source of social support, and sexual intercourse frequency can to a certain extent reflect whether the relationship between husband and wife is harmonious.
A good relationship between a husband and wife can improve spousal support for women and can effectively alleviate the adverse psychological emotions caused by the menopausal period, thereby improving women’s well-being and relieving their menopausal symptoms.
In summary, maintaining a good positive mentality, engaging in reasonable physical exercise, and promoting a good marital relationship during the menopausal period are beneficial in reducing the incidence of menopausal symptoms.
The present study found no significant correlation between age, marital status, career, the number of children, and menstruation regulation and the occurrence of menopausal symptoms through univariate analyses, which differed from the results of studies in other countries.
A Turkish study noted that women with a menopausal age of 44–50 years had a higher risk of developing menopausal symptoms [30]; a survey among women in the community showed that marital status was one of the factors affecting menopausal symptoms [31]; the results of a Greek study showed that women who were employed had less severe menopausal symptoms [32]; an Iranian study noted that women with a high number of children had more severe menopausal somatic symptoms [33]; and a Sri Lankan study noted that postmenopausal women had more severe menopausal symptoms than premenopausal women
[34].
The differences between the results of the foreign studies and the results of the present survey may be due to differences in national policies and the demographic characteristics of the respondents; for example, the one-child policy was implemented in 1979 in China [35], so 76% of the women in the present survey had only one child; in addition, 95% of the respondents in the present study were married, which lacked comparability.
Menopause is a completely new stage in women’s lives, and women’s understanding of menopause directly affects their attitudes towards menopause.
Women who lack knowledge of menopause are more likely to have negative attitudes towards it.
Research suggests that the severity of menopausal symptoms affects women’s attitudes towards menopause, with fewer symptoms being associated with more positive attitudes towards menopause [36].
A survey of perimenopausal women conducted in the UK showed that more than 60% of women had no understanding of menopause at all [37], whereas Italian studies indicated that more than half of women had never received menopause-related health education
[38].
Unlike the results of international surveys, most women in this study had some knowledge of menopause.
This result may be due to the high educational level of the respondents in this study, and the respondents were people who came to the hospital for physical examinations, had a high awareness of self-care and received more menopause health education.
MHT is a common treatment to improve menopausal symptoms and can effectively reduce adverse effects caused by fluctuations in hormone levels [39].
The results of this survey showed that the awareness and acceptance rates of MHT were low among the women, which may be related to a low educational level, a lack of knowledge about MHT and relatively higher treatment costs.
Studies have shown that negative attitudes toward MHT among healthcare professionals are a significant contributor to lower rates of MHT utilization [40].
An Israeli study found that the majority of women presenting with menopausal symptoms had not received treatment and only 12.6% had received MHT [41], in general agreement with the findings of this study.
The results of a Swedish survey showed that most women refused MHT because they considered menopause to be a normal physiological process, and received MHT because they experienced significant menopausal symptoms [42], which is consistent with the present findings.
In addition, the results of this survey showed that the main sources of MHT-related knowledge among women were menopausal women around them, medical units, and internet-based pathways; 42% of the respondents’ knowledge originated from medical units, and most of the respondents’ menopause-related knowledge came from nonmedical units.
The results of a cross-sectional survey conducted in Brazil showed that the main sources of women’s knowledge about menopause were close friends, family members, and relatives, which is consistent with the results of this study [43].
In recent years, internet information technology has developed rapidly, and the internet has the advantages of convenience, privacy, promotion, etc., so that women can receive menopause-related knowledge anytime and anywhere
[44].
This study showed that more than half of the women wanted to gain knowledge about MHT through a web-based approach.
At present, the internet has become one of the important ways for women to obtain MHT related knowledge in China, but the quality of information sourced from the internet varies and some of it has a commercial purpose [44, 45], resulting in women not being able to access scientific information.
According to a Canadian study, 17% of website information resources were rated as having very poor information quality, incomplete information and inaccurate information in the search results for “MHT” [46].
In addition, the readability of information on websites is important to the reader, and studies have found that information on websites about menopause is poorly readable and, in parts, difficult to understand [47].
Therefore, it is particularly important to improve the scientific content of internet resources.
Relevant departments should strengthen the supervision of internet information and build an internet information platform that is managed by medical and health professionals to ensure the scientific accuracy of information.
In addition, professional guidance by health care professionals is one of the important factors affecting whether women are willing to accept MHT [48], the study found that women who had a discussion with a healthcare professional were more willing to undergo MHT [49].
A study of Jamaican primary care physicians and gynecologists found that 66% were knowledgeable about treatment options for menopause and that the more knowledgeable a physician was, the more likely he or she was to direct patients to MHT treatment
[50].
But the current status of healthcare professionals’ attitudes towards MHT and mastery of related knowledge is not good.
The results of a questionnaire survey carried out in China showed that among 3216 clinical staff members, 23.3% believed that MHT was not necessary [51].
In a survey of 3426 healthcare professionals, 44.7% had not participated in professional menopausal management training in the past year, and nearly half of them could not correctly identify contraindications to MHT [52].
Therefore, to improve the awareness, acceptance and usage rates of MHT, it is necessary to strengthen the training of medical and health professionals and improve their knowledge levels.
Strengths and limitations
Our study has several key strengths.
First, the data collection method of face-to-face interviews enabled us to collect a reliable dataset that reflected the population of the study.
Second, the use of a validated questionnaire ensured the reliability of the data collected.
Finally, we converted the survey data into bar charts and forest plots to improve the visibility of the data.
Our study has some limitations:
First, this is a cross-sectional study that can only obtain data on women’s health over a specific time period and cannot track future changes.
Cross-sectional studies also cannot indicate causality.
Second, we obtained the study data from a single hospital, and the findings may not be generalizable to all women.
Third, this study did not collect data on the hormone levels of the survey respondents and cannot analyse and discuss the hormone levels of menopausal women.
Practice implications
Although our study has some limitations, it has important practical implications in terms of reducing the incidence of menopausal symptoms and improving acceptance of menopausal hormone therapy.
Firstly, this study analysed the factors affecting menopausal symptoms, which can inform healthcare providers to adopt targeted interventions to reduce the occurrence of menopausal symptoms.
Secondly, based on the results of the study, healthcare providers can make use of the Internet to develop more targeted health education programmes to help women learn about MHT, thereby changing women’s attitudes towards MHT and increasing the acceptance rate of MHT.
Women's Health may earn commission from the links on this page, but we only feature products we believe in.
Why Trust Us?
You’ve probably come across a few different types of acne in your day (we’re looking at you blackheads ), but some pimples can be extremely large, painful, and very persistent.
If your pimples aren't budging despite endless cleansing, at-home remedies, and spot treatments, you may have nodular acne.
Meet Our Experts: Lian Mack , MD, a dermatologist and the founder of GlamDerm in New York City, Vladyslava Doktor , DO, a dermatologist and the owner of Skin Center Boston
“Other acne is typically caused by simple blockage of the skin, but nodular acne is more of a mixture of hormones and bacteria that makes it very severe,” says Vladyslava Doktor, DO, a dermatologist and the owner of Skin Center Boston.
It also involves a bacteria called p. acne which causes an infection when trapped in your pores and leads to deep, uncomfortable breakouts, she explains.
While difficult, nodular acne can be treated, and it’s important to talk with your doctor to find the right plan for you.
Read ahead for everything you need to know about nodular acne in the meantime.
What Is Nodular Acne?
“Nodular acne, also known as nodulocystic acne, is a subtype of acne characterized clinically by pink firm bumps that develop beneath the skin,” says Lian Mack , MD, a dermatologist and the founder of GlamDerm in New York City.
It can be caused by several factors including hormones, diet, and stress, but acne nodules result from bacteria, combined with dead skin cells, sebum (oil), and a clogged pore that together create an inflammatory response, she explains.
Most commonly showing up on the face, back, or chest, nodular acne breakouts are typically painful to touch and cause hard lumps, knots, or mounds under the skin, says Dr. Doktor.
“[The nodules] are red and angry looking, almost like a mini volcano that doesn't want to erupt,” she explains.
The firm bumps also remain under the skin and do not have a whitehead or blackhead at the center, adds Dr. Mack.
This type of acne also tends to be resistant to topical medications and can persist for months.
So if none of your over-the-counter spot treatments or beauty products seem to be clearing away the blemishes, that may be another red flag of nodular acne, adds Dr. Mack.
What Causes Nodular Acne?
Anyone can get nodular acne and every case is different, but it can typically be caused by hormones and diet or the presence of bacteria, dead skin cells, and sebum (oil) in pores, says Dr. Mack.
“Nodular acne resulting from hormones would typically appear on the lower half of the face, along the chin and jawline, and would typically sync up with your monthly cycle, whereas nodular acne stemming from bacteria could appear anywhere, anytime,” she explains.
Nodular acne can also occur due to excessive sweating, stress and anxiety, skincare products, medication, birth control , or genetics, adds Dr. Doktor.
In other words, there's not a single culprit responsible, and it’s important to evaluate the cause holistically because it’s “multi-factorial,” she explains.
Related Story What Is Fungal Acne?
How To Treat Nodular Acne
Over-the-counter treatments aren't usually effective, so if your breakouts are painful, persistent, and/or taking a toll on your mental health and confidence, it’s best to visit a dermatologist ASAP, says Dr. Doktor.
Plus, treatment is not a one-size-fits-all type of deal, so what works for your friend may not work for you.
“Treatment is not one recipe, and I always try to approach it from different angles because it depends on the person's background,” Dr. Doktor adds.
Pro tip: If you've tried an OTC skincare regimen for 6 to 8 weeks and continue to develop cystic breakouts, then it’s time to seek help from a professional, says Dr. Mack.
If your acne is hormonally driven, Dr. Mack recommends the following:
Vitamin A derivative: The treatment regimen for hormonally driven acne usually includes a vitamin A derivative like tretinoin to reduce oil production and speed up skin cell turnover.
The treatment regimen for hormonally driven acne usually includes a vitamin A derivative like to reduce oil production and speed up skin cell turnover.
Prescription topicals: Stronger, prescribed, topical medications can lessen the effect of hormones of the sebaceous glands and minimize painful breakouts.
Stronger, prescribed, topical medications can lessen the effect of hormones of the sebaceous glands and minimize painful breakouts.
Oral medications: Depending on the severity, oral medications like spironolactone or oral contraceptives (containing estrogen and progesterone) can help cut down the amount of free testosterone in the blood, reducing the sebum production on the lower half of the face.
Depending on the severity, oral medications like or oral contraceptives (containing estrogen and progesterone) can help cut down the amount of free testosterone in the blood, reducing the sebum production on the lower half of the face.
Diet modifications: Always consult with your doctor, but diet can negatively impact nodular and/or hormonal acne.
In particular, studies suggest dairy and refined sugar have been shown to exacerbate symptoms and cause inflammation, so an elimination diet may be beneficial.
If your acne is caused by excess oil production, bacteria, and dead skin cells, the following are Dr. Mack’s go-to’s:
Topical pain relief: If your lesions are painful, Dr. Mack suggests to help with tenderness.
It’s non-irritating, non-greasy, and fast-acting.
If your lesions are painful, Dr. Mack suggests to help with tenderness.
It’s non-irritating, non-greasy, and fast-acting.
Oral medications: Like hormonally caused nodular acne, prescribed oral medications like isotretinoin (previously known as Accutane) or antibiotics can reduce sebum production, prevent clogged pores, decrease bacteria, and minimize inflammation.
Like hormonally caused nodular acne, prescribed oral medications like (previously known as Accutane) or antibiotics can reduce sebum production, prevent clogged pores, decrease bacteria, and minimize inflammation.
Topical retinoid: Topical treatments such as retinoids can squash breakouts by preventing dead cells from clogging pores and promoting cellular turnover.
Topical treatments such as retinoids can squash breakouts by preventing dead cells from clogging pores and promoting cellular turnover.
Cortisone injections: If your nodules are extremely painful, your doc may suggest a cortisone injection to bring down inflammation and speed up the healing process.
Gold Bond Lidocaine Multi-Symptom Relief Cream $13 at Amazon Credit: amazon.com
It may be tempting to treat nodular acne on your own, but here’s what you shouldn't do:
Do not pick.
I repeat, do NOT pick, squeeze, or mess with your acne.
“This will worsen scarring and can actually create another acne-like condition called acne excoriée , which is when lesions are compulsively squeezed and scratched, resulting in scabs and scars,” says Dr. Mack.
Not to mention, the scarring that results from nodular acne is often more difficult to treat than the actual breakout, she adds.
I repeat, do NOT pick, squeeze, or mess with your acne.
“This will worsen scarring and can actually create another acne-like condition called , which is when lesions are compulsively squeezed and scratched, resulting in scabs and scars,” says Dr. Mack.
Not to mention, the scarring that results from nodular acne is often more difficult to treat than the actual breakout, she adds.
Avoid touching your face.
To reduce adding additional bacteria to the skin, keep your hands off your face.
If you need to touch, make sure your hands ( and makeup brushes! )
are clean, says Dr. Mack.
To reduce adding additional bacteria to the skin, keep your hands off your face.
If you need to touch, make sure your hands ( ) are clean, says Dr. Mack.
Don’t go overboard on products.
Your skincare routine is important, but keep it basic and oil-free.
Even if your products are “anti-acne,” too much may cause an angry response and irritation to the skin, says Dr. Doktor.
“Keep the cleansing and moisturizer as simple and as less irritating as possible, so over-the-counter cleansers should be hydrating and gentle like , , and .”
Over two-thirds of non-hospitalised patients infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus in the first wave of the pandemic developed long COVID, according to a study conducted in Spain.
The results, published in the journal JAMA Network Open, reinforce the hypothesis that long-COVID symptoms are not correlated with infection severity alone.
The study found that nearly 60 per cent of hospitalised COVID-19 patients and 68 per cent of their nonhospitalised counterparts seen at two healthcare centres in Madrid, early in the pandemic reported still having at least one symptom two years later.
Led by researchers at Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, the study was conducted from Mar 20 to Apr 30, 2020 -- a period dominated by the wild-type virus -- among 360 hospitalised and 308 nonhospitalised, randomly selected COVID-19 patients, with telephone follow-up two years later.
The team said this is the largest and longest-term follow-up comparison of the two groups thus far.
Average age was 60.7 years in the hospitalised group and 56.7 years among outpatients.
A greater share of hospitalised than nonhospitalised participants had preexisting diabetes.
The most common symptoms during the acute infection were fever, shortness of breath, muscle pain, and cough, the researchers said.
A greater proportion of hospitalised patients than outpatients had shortness of breath, while the opposite was true for loss of smell, they said.
Differences in the rates of shortness of breath and loss of smell between the groups could have resulted from patients experiencing milder symptoms (eg, loss of smell) and therefore not seeking hospitalisation, the researchers said.
At two years, 59.7 per cent of hospitalised patients and 67.5 per cent of outpatients had at least one persistent COVID-19 symptom.
The most common persistent symptoms among both hospitalised and nonhospitalised patients were fatigue, pain, and memory loss.
There were no significant differences in post-COVID symptoms between the two groups, although hospital patients showed slightly more anxiety than outpatients.
Risk factors for lingering fatigue among hospitalised patients were more underlying medical conditions and shortness of breath.
Among nonhospitalised patients, more underlying medical conditions and more symptoms at illness onset were tied to continued fatigue.
The researchers warned that the lack of inclusion of uninfected controls limited their ability to evaluate the link between SARS-CoV-2 infection and overall and specific COVID-19 symptoms at two years.
"Current evidence supports that long COVID will require specific management attention independently of whether the patient has been hospitalised or not," the resaerchers added.
One of the most powerful schizophrenia antipsychotic treatments I have found for negative symptoms is weight lifting.
In the past, I have also talked about how a pragmatic low-carbohydrate diet is great for reducing symptoms naturally.
In my experience, however, low-carbohydrate diets generally reduce positive symptoms, not negative symptoms.
Over the years I received treatment from multiple psychiatrists.
It seems to be a continual struggle for them to find ways to reduce my negative symptoms.
I’m certain if any doctors treating psychosis are reading this, they’ve experienced the same challenges.
Advertisement
Here’s what this scientific paper had to say about negative symptoms in schizophrenia:
“…no pharmacologic treatment for negative symptoms has proven to have sufficient evidence to support a recommendation, indicating a significant unmet need for important treatment in this area.”
So at this point, we know two things about negative symptoms in schizophrenia.
One, negative symptoms are the most pervasive and debilitating symptoms in schizophrenia.
Two, they are extremely difficult to treat, and there is a significant unmet need in treatment for negative symptoms.
Advertisement
Weight lifting as a schizophrenia antipsychotic transformed my life
My life completely transformed when I began to understand and see the benefits of weight lifting.
I went from what I call a “no-life video gamer” into a physically fit web developer.
Someone with an active social life and intimate relationship.
Things I previously assumed was never possible.
Previously, I was content with working as a part-time grocer living with my parents and playing video games.
In less than a year, I became a person with his dreams being fulfilled.
A person making ambitious goals (and sometimes accomplished!).
I established myself as a valuable member of the communities I engage in.
In my post about why I think schizophrenic men should be bodybuilders, I go into more detail about why I think bodybuilding is so good for us.
Motivation deficiency is the biggest negative symptom that immobilized me from accomplishing my goals (or pretty much anything).
Motivation deficiency, as it relates to schizophrenia, may be known as avolition or lack of motivation.
It truly is magical what weight lifting does to my brain.
Advertisement
With anything related to the brain, it can be extremely difficult to notice or measure when there is a change.
For me, the evidence is undeniable.
If I do something as small as three sets of deadlifts on a Sunday, I will be motivated and high functioning throughout the entire week.
It would take at least 10 days before my motivation falters and I start to become stuck in a rut again.
Whenever I feel like my daily life isn’t going in the direction I want it to, weight lifting is the easiest answer to my problems.
And, most times, it works.
Weight lifting is the answer.
Advertisement
How you weight lift is up to you
Whether you get help from a personal trainer, use machines at the gym, do push-ups at home or anything in between is up to you.
The only right answer is the type of exercise that makes you motivated and ambitious again.
In my experience, weight lifting created so much productivity and motivation, I thought I went into a weird permanent state of bipolar mania.
My paranoid thoughts about being manic existed for two years.
My heightened state of functioning felt like a superpower.
To be honest, it still does feel like a superpower.
Even compared to my counterparts who do not struggle with mental illness, I am seen as high-functioning.
If you can start feeling like this, you will know the true power of weight lifting.
Advertisement
It may take some time, but you should eventually find this works for you.
I personally didn’t see the full benefits of weight lifting until I started doing larger weights.
I found that the heavier weights you lift, the more testosterone is produced.
As mentioned in the blog post I linked earlier, testosterone production is the key ingredient to making all of this work.
The heavier the weights, the better.
For me, I find 200 to 250 pounds of deadlifts are enough for me.
I am 6 ft. tall and 180 pounds.
Once you get to heavier weights appropriate for your body’s size, superpowers await you.
Good luck!
Rat-bite fever is a bacterial infection that transmits through contact with rats, other rodents, and contaminated foods and drinks.
In May 2020, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) announced that many communities have reported increased rodent activity.
The risk of infection due to a rat bite is around 10% , and children living in poverty have the highest risk of developing rat-bite fever (RBF) as a result.
Without antibiotic treatment, RBF can cause severe complications, including damage to bones and inflammation of the heart, brain, and spinal cord.
It can be fatal.
In this article, we describe RBF and discuss its causes and treatments.
What is RBF?
Share on Pinterest Image credit: Pierre Aden / EyeEm/Getty Images RBF is a severe infection caused by Streptobacillus moniliformis or Spirillum minus bacteria.
These spread to humans through rat bites, contact with rat urine and feces, and contaminated foods and drinks.
As researchers observe in a 2020 review , “Annually, more than 2 million animal bites occur in the United States, and rats are responsible for approximately 1%.”
They go on to report that RBF tends to develop in children younger than 5 years who are living in conditions of poverty.
The researchers also note that people working with rats in pet stores and labs are at risk, and that the risk of an infection stemming from a bite is roughly 10%.
In a 2018 study , researchers identified 11 reports of RBF in Vancouver Island, Canada, between 2010 and 2016.
RBF occurred in people aged 5–57 years, nine of whom sustained the bites from pet rats.
RBF can cause severe complications, and an estimated 7–13% of people who do not receive treatment for RBF die as a result, though the rate is higher in people with serious complications.
Causes There are two types of RBF.
The most common type in North America is called streptobacillary RBF, as it results from infection with S. moniliformis.
The other type is spirillary RBF, or sodoku.
It is caused by S. minus bacteria, and this is the primary type in Asia.
A person develops RBF after one of these types of bacteria enters the body, through an open wound or the mucous membranes of the eyes, nose, or mouth.
The bacteria that cause RBF transmit to people through: bites or scratches from infected rodents
the saliva, urine, or feces of infected rodents
contact with contaminated surfaces
contaminated foods or drinks
Although reports of RBF occur globally, this disease is relatively rare.
However, a person may have a higher risk of RBF if they: handle rats as part of their work
live in an infested building or area
keep rats or other rodents as pets RBF does not pass from person to person.
Symptoms The symptoms of RBF vary depending on the underlying bacterial infection.
S. moniliformis has an incubation period of 3–20 days .
The incubation period is the time between the exposure to the bacteria and the appearance of symptoms.
Symptoms of streptobacillary RBF include: a fever that comes and goes for several weeks
a rash near a rat bite
joint and muscle pain, especially in the lower back
chills
nausea
vomiting
a sore throat A bite that causes spirillary RBF may start healing before the symptoms appear.
The symptoms may take 1–3 weeks to arise, and they include: a fever and chills
muscle and joint pain
a headache
a sore throat
vomiting
inflammation and ulceration near the site of the bite
a brown or purple rash
hard or tender lymph nodes
Treatment Doctors treat RBF with antibiotics.
A person takes them for 7–14 days or up to 4 weeks if there are complications.
If a person does not receive treatment, RBF can lead to severe complications , such as: abscesses, or pockets of fluid inside the body
inflammation of the liver or kidneys
interstitial pneumonia, which causes lung scarring
infections of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord
endocarditis, or inflammation of the membrane surrounding the heart
bone damage If RBF causes endocarditis, the mortality rate is 53%.
Penicillin is the current antibiotic of choice for both types of RBF.
However, penicillin can trigger allergic responses in some people.
According to the CDC , about 10% of all people have penicillin allergies.
Signs of a penicillin allergy include: hives, which are itchy, raised bumps on the skin
swelling of the face, hands, and feet
difficulty breathing
coughing
chest tightness
dizziness People with penicillin allergies may receive either streptomycin or doxycycline instead.
Without treatment, RBF can cause severe, even life-threatening complications.
Seek immediate medical attention if any unusual symptoms follow a rat bite.
A doctor can diagnose S. moniliformis by taking a sample of blood or tissue for testing.
A person usually receives the results within 3 days, though the timing can vary.
To diagnose S. minus, a doctor takes a tissue sample for testing.
The tissue is placed on a glass slide and treated with a stain.
A laboratory technician examines this slide and can recognize the bacteria by their size, shape, and color.
How to live longer - the 30p a day snack to avoid early death
Early intervention is complicated by the fact that symptoms often creep up suddenly, forcing you into reactive mode.
Evidence suggests there are a number of subtle symptoms that may signal you are at risk of having a heart attack long before the event itself, however.
According to a study published in the journal Circulation, your body can send unusual signals that may indicate your risk of having a heart attack.
One unusual sign is an earlobe crease.
READ MORE: Heart attack: The peculiar symptom found in your feet – what to look out for
Concept of autism and autistic development disorder as a symbol of a communication and social behavior psychology as a chalk drawing on asphalt in a 3D illustration style.
(NewsNation) — Researchers discovered a common epilepsy drug may reverse symptoms of autism, at least in mice.
The study builds on research into the effect of protein anomalies on neurological conditions.
Changes to the MYT1L protein in mice resulted in behavior changes that can occur in those with autism spectrum disorder.
About one in 44 children are diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Autism is believed to be caused by changes in the brain, with symptoms that include difficulties with social communication and interaction, repetitive and restrictive interests and hyperactivity, among others.
In the recent study, researchers used the drug lamotrigine, typically used to treat epilepsy, to treat mice with a MYT1L abnormality.
The mice treated with lamotrigine showed a reversal in some behaviors associated with autism, including hyperactivity.
Rates of autism have risen in recent years, and there has been debate over whether the increase has been caused by environmental or genetic factors or if it’s driven by increased awareness leading to more diagnoses.
There has also been controversy over the search for a cure for autism.
While some parents and autistic people are interested in research for a cure, others say their autism is not something that needs to be fixed.
The use of lamotrigine has only been tested in mice so far, though researchers are planning to launch human clinical trials in the future.
For most women, a certain degree of menstrual pain is normal.
As many as 75 percent of women experience period pain during their reproductive years, notes a study in the August 2019 Journal of Women’s Health.
But it can also be a sign of something more serious, like uterine fibroids.
What Are Uterine Fibroids?
If you’re experiencing long-lasting period pain, or pain that worsens as you get older, it may be a sign of uterine fibroids.
“Uterine fibroids are benign smooth muscle growths of the uterus,” says Linda Bradley, MD, the director of the fibroid and menstrual disorders center at Cleveland Clinic in Ohio.
These growths are rarely cancerous, and they’re very common — about 80 percent of women develop fibroids by age 50, according to the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services.
That said, they’re more common in some populations than others.
Although fibroids can develop at any age, uterine fibroids are most common in women ages 30 to 40.
Black women are more likely to develop uterine fibroids than white women; fibroids tend to develop at a younger age and grow more quickly in Black women, as well.
Common Symptoms of Uterine Fibroids
Some women who have uterine fibroids may not experience any symptoms.
Others, however, may experience a range of symptoms that affect their period and beyond, such as:
Abdominal or lower back pain
Pelvic pain and cramping
Painful sex
Heavy menstrual bleeding
Long, frequent periods
Bleeding between periods
Anemia (from blood loss)
Bladder or bowel pressure
Frequent or urgent urination
Bowel movements that are difficult, frequent, or urgent
Increased abdominal size
Miscarriage
Infertility
“Your symptoms generally depend on the location and number of uterine fibroids,” says Dr. Bradley.
Why Uterine Fibroids Cause Painful Periods
Each month, your uterus goes through a cycle: It creates a thickened inner lining in case a pregnancy occurs.
If pregnancy does not occur, your body sheds that lining — this is your period.
During a normal period, your body releases hormones called prostaglandins.
These hormones can cause pain and inflammation and can increase the intensity of uterine contractions, which may worsen menstrual cramping.
And women who have elevated levels of prostaglandins may experience even more severe menstrual pain.
Fibroids can make this pain more intense: First, fibroids put pressure on the uterine lining.
Then, if you have fibroids within the uterine wall, or fibroids that protrude into the uterine cavity, more surface area is created, which means more thickened lining for your body to shed during your period — that is, a heavier flow.
“For women who bleed a lot, large clots can form,” says Bradley.
“As all of this blood and clotting is trying to come through the narrow cervix and be expelled from the body, the uterus is contracting more, which can cause pain.”
In the days leading up to your period, you might feel more intense cramping as your uterus goes through its motions to force out the lining, and a stronger sensation of pressure when your period starts because of the heavier blood flow.
If the uterine fibroids are large, you also may feel a stronger sensation of pressure at the time of your period due to blood flow to the fibroids.
Treatment Options for Uterine Fibroid Pain
Aside from uterine fibroids, period pain can be caused by health conditions like endometriosis or ovarian cysts.
So if you’re dealing with period pain, it’s important to see your doctor or gynecologist to determine the underlying cause and recommend the proper course of treatment, says Bradley.
If you are diagnosed with uterine fibroids, a variety of treatment options can help you manage symptoms like heavy menstrual bleeding, pelvic pain, and pressure, and certain medications also treat the underlying uterine fibroids.
Pain relievers, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like ibuprofen or naproxen, can help alleviate period pain and decrease bleeding, but do not shrink the size of the fibroids themselves.
Hormonal birth control, such as the pill, the ring, injections, and intrauterine devices (IUDs), decrease bleeding and alleviate menstrual pain and cramping, but do not shrink the size of uterine fibroids.
Oral medications, including hormonal or nonhormonal options, used to treat heavy menstrual periods can alleviate uncomfortable uterine fibroid symptoms.
Hormone injections, such as gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists, can induce a temporary menopause-like state and help shrink the size of uterine fibroids while you’re taking the medication, which in turn can improve your symptoms — but once you stop taking the drug, the fibroids usually grow back, and these medications cannot be taken long-term.
Complementary therapies, ranging from heating pads to regular exercise and diet alterations, to strategies like acupuncture and massage, may help you manage pain and other symptoms related to uterine fibroids.
“If it’s getting to the point where your quality of life is bad — you’re staying home and missing work, activities, and hobbies — your physician needs to look at other therapies, such as surgical procedures,” says Bradley.
Hysterectomy, which removes the entire uterus, remains the definitive procedure for treating uterine fibroids.
But today there also are a range of surgical options that are significantly less invasive and have a shorter recovery time.
A noninvasive procedure called MRI-guided focused ultrasound surgery (FUS) is performed while a patient is in an MRI scanner; MRI images allow the doctor to see where fibroids are located and target them with sound waves that destroy the tissue, according to the Mayo Clinic.
Minimally invasive procedures, like radiofrequency ablation or embolization, also aim to shrink or remove the uterine fibroids.
It’s important to note that MRI-guided FUS has a high re-intervention rate, according to research published in January 2022 in the International Journal of Hyperthermia, and isn’t as readily available as uterine artery embolization.
“The No. 1 cause of hysterectomies in America is uterine fibroids with pain, heavy bleeding, or discomfort,” says Bradley.
“But we have new options — you’re not relegated to a hysterectomy.
There are many other procedures that are less aggressive or less invasive.”
Treatment is an individualized decision, and you need to see a physician who really looks at the whole patient, explains Bradley.
The type of treatment you opt for should take into consideration your age, fertility plans, and the size and location of the uterine fibroids — and should be as minimally invasive as possible, she adds.
ADHD affects males and females, but research suggests an increased prevalence in males.
This discrepancy may be due to differences in how ADHD manifests, referral bias, and misdiagnosis or delays in diagnosis.
Share on Pinterest Catherine Falls Commercial/Getty Images Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by developmentally atypical levels of: inattention
hyperactivity
impulsivity This article explores the differences in ADHD symptoms and presentation, diagnosis, and treatment between males and females.
A note about sex and gender Sex and gender exist on spectrums.
This article will use the terms “male,” “female,” or both to refer to sex assigned at birth.
Click here to learn more.
Was this helpful?
Children with ADHD
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , roughly 6 million children ages 3–17 years in the United States are diagnosed with ADHD.
Doctors diagnose the condition as early as age 3–7 years.
Often, it lasts into adulthood.
ADHD is also three times more common in males than females, and subtypes tend to have a different prevalence.
Due to this discrepancy in the prevalence of ADHD among males and females, researchers have undertaken studies to explore the sex differences in ADHD and the possible cause of the discrepancy.
Sex differences in ADHD remain poorly understood because most previous studies relied on subjective measures of ADHD, a methodology prone to bias.
These studies also included a limited proportion of girls.
Evidence suggests that this diagnostic discrepancy and subsequent referral bias is partly due to differences in how ADHD presents in females.
According to a 2020 report, females with ADHD display an altered set of behaviors, symptoms, and comorbidities.
Read more on the importance of ADHD awareness here.
Differences or overlaps in symptoms of ADHD A 2019 study aimed to explore the sex differences in subjective and objective measures of ADHD among children referred to clinics.
The study’s researchers found that certain subjective and objective measures of ADHD may capture different symptoms in males and females.
Parents and teachers report that girls have more inattention problems, but objective measures reveal that boys have more serious impulsivity problems.
A 2018 study found that the higher male-to-female diagnosis ratio is seen in clinical samples but not in population samples, suggesting a possible sex bias in the diagnostic process of ADHD.
This research shows that people with ADHD are more likely to receive a diagnosis and treatment when they show prominent externalizing symptoms.
This includes females.
Further, research from 2020 corroborates that females are more likely to be inattentive, while males are more likely to have combined symptoms with higher rates of impulsivity and hyperactivity.
Read more about the early signs of ADHD.
Differences in the diagnosis of ADHD across sexes As males tend to exhibit hyperactive symptoms that may be bothersome and disruptive to others, they tend to receive a diagnosis earlier than females.
Meanwhile, females may not display this inattentive behavior prominently so doctors may miss the condition.
Additionally, inattention symptoms in females with ADHD are more likely to occur in structured educational environments, such as college, which may delay the diagnosis.
And females may develop better coping strategies to compensate for their ADHD-related difficulties.
A 2018 study found that ADHD risk is more likely to manifest or be diagnosed as anxiety or depression in females than in males.
As ADHD symptoms are less overt in females, experts are more likely to diagnose them with personality or internalizing disorders, further delaying diagnosis and treatment.
Diagnostic criteria There is no single test to diagnose ADHD.
Instead, a doctor will make a diagnosis after a detailed assessment.
This assessment typically involves collecting information from relevant informants, such as parents, caregivers, and teachers.
To receive a diagnosis of ADHD, a child or teenager must have six or more symptoms of inattention or 6 or more symptoms of hyperactivity and impulsivity.
These should be present continuously for at least 6 months.
They should also be present in two or more settings, such as the child’s home and school.
Several symptoms should also manifest before the age of 12 years.
A 2019 study showed that ADHD in girls might need to have more emotional or behavioral problems to meet the full diagnostic criteria of ADHD.
The same study found that parents may also underestimate the severity and impairment of hyperactivity and impulsiveness in girls while overrating these symptoms in boys.
Further, a 2018 study found that females were more likely to show increases in symptoms in early adolescence compared with boys, who may show elevated symptoms from childhood.
Therefore, doctors are more likely to exclude girls from diagnosis because of the age of onset criteria.
Find out more about who can diagnose and treat ADHD.
Weather in your inbox
Your local forecast, plus daily trivia, stunning photos and our meteorologists’ top picks.
All in one place, every weekday morning.
Email
Forecast Location Info
Sign Up
By signing up, you're opting in to receive the Morning Brief email newsletter.
To manage your data, visit Data Rights.
Terms of Use | Privacy Policy
Delays in seeking care for ST-segment elevation MI (STEMI) appeared more important than contemporary in-hospital delays for coronary angioplasty, a study suggested.
Whereas time from hospital arrival to angioplasty balloon inflation was not a significant predictor of larger infarct size after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), symptom-to-balloon time (SBT) was.
Compared with infarcts seen after a SBT of no more than 2 hours, they took up 2.0% more left ventricular mass (95% CI 0.4-3.5) if the time was 2 to 4 hours and 4.4% more if the time was even longer (95% CI 2.7-6.1).
Similarly, SBT was an independent predictor of greater microvascular obstruction (MVO) post-PCI, unlike door-to-balloon time (DBT), according to Gregg Stone, MD, of Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York City and the Cardiovascular Research Foundation, and colleagues reporting in Circulation: Cardiovascular Interventions.
While underpowered for clinical outcomes, the study also showed a stronger relationship of SBT vs DBT for the composite of death or heart failure hospitalization, which is as would be expected since infarct size and MVO after reperfusion therapy are both independent predictors of subsequent heart failure and mortality, Stone's group added.
SBT accounts for pre-hospital delays but may be subject to imprecise patient perception and recollection as to the time of symptom onset in STEMI.
Accordingly, DBT has become the preferred performance metric for PCI in STEMI.
U.S. guidelines recommend that DBTs not exceed 90 minutes, whereas European ones push the goal even further to 60 minutes.
Collective efforts to achieve this mean that DBTs are now nearly always under 90 minutes in contemporary angioplasty practice, according to Stone and colleagues.
"While we shouldn't become complacent and relax our current standards of rapidly performing PCI as soon as possible after the patient reaches the hospital, this study suggests that major efforts to further shorten DBTs by 10 or 20 minutes might not translate to better PCI outcomes," Stone said in a press release.
"Our analysis indicates the more important and meaningful focus should be to shorten the delays from symptom onset to arrival at hospitals that can perform PCI.
We must emphasize efforts to increase public awareness of heart attack symptoms and shorten the time it takes for patients to access emergency care," Stone urged.
In the study, STEMI patients with longer SBTs in their study tended to be older and more likely women.
They also more commonly presented with hypertension, diabetes, and left circumflex artery as the culprit vessel.
The investigators had pooled ten PCI trials that included a total of 3,115 STEMI patients with sufficient imaging data.
Infarct size had been assessed a median 5 days after PCI by SPECT or cardiac MRI.
Microvascular obstruction was assessed with cardiac MRI.
Median SBT and DBT were 185 minutes and 46 minutes, respectively.
Trials included in the study were INFUSE-AMI, APEX, CRISP, AIDA, LIPSIA-N-ACC, LIPSIA-STEMI, LIPSIA-ABCIX, EMERALD, AMIHOT-II, and IMMEDIATE.
There was some heterogeneity in the study populations and endpoint definitions among these trials, investigators acknowledged.
Chief among the limitations of the study was that the authors did not have sufficient information to adjust for intensity of chest pain and other clinical symptoms of STEMI, time to first medical contact, or the presence and extent of coronary collaterals.
Even so, the findings are important and especially relevant today, according to American Heart Association President Mitchell Elkind, MD, MS, of New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Irving Medical Center in New York City.
"During the peaks of the COVID-19 pandemic, hospitals are reporting fewer people coming into the emergency room for heart attack and stroke symptoms -- indicating people aren't calling 911, or they are delaying or avoiding critical care," Elkind said in the press release.
"These new findings emphasize just how crucial it is to call 911 at the first sign of a heart attack or stroke – because getting quick treatment can be the difference between life and death," he said.
"As we have been urging even during the COVID-19 pandemic, don't die of doubt.
Call 911 as soon as possible.
"
Nicole Lou is a reporter for MedPage Today, where she covers cardiology news and other developments in medicine.
Follow
Disclosures Stone disclosed receiving honoraria from Cook, Terumo, QOOL Therapeutics, and Orchestra Biomed; consulting to Valfix, TherOx, Vascular Dynamics, Robocath, HeartFlow, Gore, Ablative Solutions, Miracor, Neovasc, V-Wave, Abiomed, Ancora, MAIA Pharmaceuticals, Vectorious, Reva, and Matrizyme; and holding equity/options from Ancora, Qool Therapeutics, Cagent, Applied Therapeutics, the Biostar family of funds, SpectraWave, Orchestra Biomed, Aria, Cardiac Success, the MedFocus family of funds, and Valfix.
Primary Source Circulation: Cardiovascular Interventions Source Reference: Redfors B, et al "Time delay, infarct size and microvascular obstruction after primary PCI for ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction" Circ Cardiovasc Interv 2021; DOI: 10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.120.009879.
Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
CORVALLIS, Ore. – Older adults who took a daily multivitamin and mineral supplement with zinc and high amounts of vitamin C in a 12-week study experienced sickness for shorter periods and with less severe symptoms than counterparts in a control group receiving a placebo.
The findings by Oregon State University researchers were published in the journal Nutrients.
The research by scientists at OSU’s Linus Pauling Institute involved 42 healthy people ages 55 to 75 and was designed to measure the supplement’s effects on certain immune system indicators.
It also looked at bloodstream levels of zinc and vitamins C and D while taking the supplement, as these micronutrients are important for proper immune function.
The immune indicators, including white blood cells’ ability to kill incoming pathogens, were unaltered in the group receiving the supplement.
The multivitamin group showedimproved vitamin C and zinc status in the blood.
Most intriguingly, illness symptoms reported by this group were less severe and went away faster than those experienced by the placebo group.
The same percentage of participants in each group reported symptoms, but days of sickness in the supplement group averaged fewer than three compared to more than six for the placebo group.
“The observed illness differences were striking,” said corresponding author Adrian Gombart, professor of biochemistry and biophysics in the OSU College of Science and a principal investigator at the Linus Pauling Institute.
“While the study was limited to self-reported illness data and we did not design the study to answer this question, the observed differences suggest that additional larger studies designed for these outcomes are warranted – and, frankly, overdue.”
As people get older, the risk of vitamin and mineral deficiencies that contribute to age-related immune system deficiencies rises.
Across the United States, Canada and Europe, research suggests more than one-third of older adults are deficient in at least one micronutrient, often more than one.
“That likely contributes to a decline in the immune system, most often characterized by increased levels of inflammation, reduced innate immune function and reduced T-cell function,” Gombart said.
“Since multiple nutrients support immune function, older adults often benefit from multivitamin and mineral supplements.
These are readily available, inexpensive and generally regarded as safe.”
The multivitamin supplement used in the study focused on vitamins and minerals typically thought to help immunity.
It contained 700 micrograms of vitamin A; 400 international units of vitamin D; 45 milligrams of vitamin E; 6.6 milligrams of vitamin B6; 400 micrograms of folate; 9.6 micrograms of vitamin B12; 1,000 milligrams of vitamin C; 5 milligrams of iron; 0.9 milligrams of copper; 10 milligrams of zinc; and 110 micrograms of selenium.
“Supplementation was associated with significantly increased circulating levels of zinc and vitamin C, and with illness symptoms that were less severe and shorter lasting,” Gombart said.
“This supports findings that stretch back decades, even to the days of Linus Pauling’s work with vitamin C. Our results suggest more and better designed research studies are needed to explore the positive role multivitamin and mineral supplementation might play in bolstering the immune system of older adults.”
Bayer Consumer Care funded the study through an Institution Initiated Research grant and also provided the supplements (Redoxon® VI) and placebos.
Bayer had no role in the study’s design, the data’s collection, analyses or interpretation, the writing of the research manuscript or the decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
Collaborating with Gombart were Linus Pauling Institute colleagues Mary Fantacone, Malcolm Lowry, Sandra Uesugi, Alexander Michels, Jaewoo Choi, Scott Leonard, Sean Gombart, Jeffrey Gombart and Gerd Bobe.
Maybe you've been told "you don't look depressed" despite feeling low for months.
Or perhaps you've been excelling at work but also isolating yourself both in and out of the office because you just don't feel like being around people.
Whatever the case may be, high-functioning depression is a very real — and, according to the thousands of Instagram posts, very common — mental health challenge.
While high-functioning depression is often milder (and more sustained) than clinical depression, it can in fact be just as painful.
The most significant difference between the two?
How they look from the outside, with "high-functioning" individuals being better able to get on with daily tasks and often putting on a happy face for their friends, family, and coworkers.
But is it a legit condition?
And, either way, how do you know if you have it?
Here, mental health experts break down what high-functioning depression really looks like, including the signs, symptoms, and treatment.
What Is High-Functioning Depression?
"'High-functioning depression' isn't an official medical diagnosis or mental health disorder [recognized by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder (DSM), the catalog of psychological conditions widely used by clinicians to diagnose patients]," says Brooke Schwartz, L.C.S.W., L.M.S.W., a psychotherapist in Los Angeles.
"Rather, it's a nonmedical and colloquial term people use to describe milder forms of depression that don't completely stop one's day-to-day functioning despite producing an unwanted emotional experience.
"
Carly Snyder, M.D., reproductive and perinatal psychiatrist People with high-functioning depression live with a constant feeling of sadness, but they remain able to function in life, to sleep and eat well, and from the outside, the person may appear healthy and happy.
— Carly Snyder, M.D., reproductive and perinatal psychiatrist
While it's not technically in the DSM, high-functioning depression "would likely fall under the heading of mild depression and/or PDD
[persistent depressive disorder] depending on how long someone has been symptomatic," says Carly Snyder, M.D., a reproductive and perinatal psychiatrist in New York City.
PDD is characterized by chronic, low-level depression that's not as severe but may be longer-lasting than major depressive disorder (MDD), according to the National Institue of Mental Health (NIMH).
To be diagnosed with PDD, you typically have to experience a combination of less intense depressive symptoms for two years or more.
(In other words, someone with high-functioning depression will likely qualify for a PDD diagnosis if they have been experiencing symptoms for at least two years.)
MDD, on the other hand, "​​is more severe in its symptoms as well as its impairment in functioning," says Elizabeth Lombardo, Ph.D., best-selling author of Get Out of the Red Zone:
Transform Your Stress to Optimize True Success.
"People with MDD [aka clinical depression] often have trouble functioning, including participating at work or school, interacting socially, or taking care of themselves effectively; they also experience severe depression more days than not over at least a two-week period.
"
In addition to being milder, high-functioning depression distinguishes itself from clinical depression by being less visible than what you might think of simply as depression.
It also tends to be more sustained, meaning episodes may last longer (e.g. you might feel mildly depressed for years without breaks) than those that might come with a more intense (diagnosable) form of depression.
"People with high-functioning depression live with a constant feeling of sadness, but they remain able to function in life, to sleep and eat well, and from the outside, the person may appear healthy and happy," says Dr. Snyder.
But just because someone is able to carry on with their daily tasks doesn't mean that their experience of depression is any less valid — and, sometimes, it can be as painful as that of clinical depression.
Because of this, the distinction often lies only in what that experience looks like outwardly, says Richard Kim, M.D., a board-certified psychiatrist in Virginia.
"Essentially they 'look fine,' but inside they're not," explains Dr. Kim.
"Patients with high-functioning depression can even start to get overwhelmed internally, and think that life is not worth living or have suicidal thoughts."
(
It's important to note that while there is a lot of overlap between high-functioning depression and PDD, someone with a diagnosis of MDD can actually also experience high-functioning depression.
"High-functioning depression can be the terminology used to describe someone who has major depressive disorder in remission or recurrent MDD," says Schwartz.
"Someone who experiences recurrent MDD may find that, between depressive episodes, they are still depressed yet the depression is less debilitating or noticeable — this is what some are now calling 'high-functioning depression.'
"
Signs and Symptoms of High-Functioning Depression
Because high-functioning depression isn't an official diagnosis and every individual is different, the signs and symptoms of it can vary greatly from person to person.
That being said, they're largely the same as those associated with MDD; the difference mostly lies in how many you're experiencing at once and their intensity.
"A diagnosis of moderate to severe MDD requires the presence of at least five symptoms," says Dr. Snyder.
"Mild depression [such as PDD] requires the presence of two to four symptoms, including hopelessness, for more days than not for at least two years.
Hopelessness is not a core symptom of MDD, but must be present for a diagnosis of PDD.
"
With that in mind, below are some of the symptoms of high-functioning depression, according to the experts:
Emotional Symptoms of High-Functioning Anxiety:
Low mood or sadness
Hopelessness
Loss of enjoyment in favorite activities (aka anhedonia)
Loss of motivation
Feelings of shame or guilt
Low self-esteem
Difficulty focusing
Tearfulness (i.e. crying)
Restlessness
Irritability
Anxiety
Substance abuse
Suicidal ideation
Physical Symptoms of High-Functioning Anxiety:
Insomnia or excessive sleeping
Appetite disturbances
Changes in libido
Low energy (including sluggishness)
Aches and pains
Physical manifestations of anxiety (e.g. gastrointestinal problems, headaches, muscle tension)
Treatment for High-Functioning Depression
If you're experiencing high-functioning depression, know that help is available and there are many steps you can take to get better.
Try Therapy
If you've been suffering for a while, therapy — in various forms — is often a top recommendation for treatment.
"Behavioral activation and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) are two effective evidence-based treatments, which can be used either separately or in tandem," says Schwartz.
"Behavioral activation is based on an understanding that depression keeps you from doing things that bring you enjoyment, and that it can be treated by reversing this cycle by purposefully scheduling enjoyable and meaningful activities.
CBT for depression works to modify thought patterns in order to change one's mood and behavior."
(Want to understand more?
Read about CBT, check out mental health apps, or look into telemedicine.)
Other therapeutic methodologies for treating high-functioning depression include psychodynamic therapy and EDMR, says Dr. Snyder.
The former focuses on the "psychological roots of emotional suffering" to promote self-reflection and self-examination; and the latter encourages the patient to concentrate on a trauma memory as they experience a series of side-to-side eye movements, which is associated with reduced vividness and emotion of the memories, according to the American Psychological Association (APA).
Make Some Changes — for the Better
Although you can and should ask for external help to ease high-functioning depression, there are also things you can do yourself in order to get better.
"Exercise, meditation, good nutrition, self-care, getting quality sleep, interacting socially with people who you care about, and journaling are all examples of beneficial lifestyle changes that you can apply," says Lombardo.
In general, these practices can "help with depression because they increase the depressed person's contact with activities that are positively rewarding and help them increase awareness of how their behavior affects their mood," explains Schwartz.
"Someone experiencing depression can't possibly experience the benefits of socializing if they are isolating 24/7.
If they make a lifestyle change that involves calling a friend [once a] day and it even only slightly improves their mood, this is information for the brain that behavior change = mood change.
"
Work On Shifting Your Mindset
When you have depression, hopelessness can be a self-fulfilling prophecy, i.e. the more depressed you feel, the more hopeless you may become about potentially recovering, and the more hopeless you are, the more depressed you'll feel.
But you can break the cycle.
Embracing hope that things can get better and feeling empowered that you can make a difference in your mental health can be "vital to help someone with high-functioning depression get better," says Lombardo.
Of course, simply telling yourself to change your mindset probably won't get you very far, but practicing shifting your thoughts over time — think: gradually — very well might.
It may feel uncomfortable at first but will become more of a habit as you get used to it.
While there are a variety of methods to "move toward" a better mindset, "one way is by reframing judgmental or ruminative thoughts as factual and nonjudgmental statements," says Schwartz.
"For example, you could reframe, 'No one ever wants to spend time with me' to 'I haven't spoken to any friends in four days.'
The more these reframes are practiced, the more second-nature they become."
(Up next: What Is High-Functioning Anxiety?)
Figures estimate 19,500 people with cancer in England will not be diagnosed due to missed referrals, which could take until 2033 to clear.
But outcomes for cancer patients in the UK already lag behind those of the rest of Europe, with the exception of testicular cancer.
Testicular cancer is the most common cancer among men, typically occurring in men around the age of 28.
The disease is one of the few cancers to flaunt survival rates of 95 percent.
READ MORE:
Dementia treatment: Can doing a crossword-a-day reduce symptoms?
Facts checked
The impact of vitamin D supplementation on depressive symptoms For the study, the researchers examined 41 RCTs including 53, 235 people in their analysis.
They looked at data including age, vitamin D levels at baseline and post-treatment, and data on depressive symptoms.
They also included details of vitamin D supplementation, including: duration
dose
type
frequency
possible calcium supplementation or add-on medications Overall, the researchers found that vitamin D supplementation had a small to moderate effect on depressive symptoms.
Effect sizes were slightly larger among people with baseline vitamin D levels below 50 nanomoles per liter (nmol/L) — the borderline for low vitamin D levels — than those with vitamin D levels above this threshold at baseline.
The researchers also noted that while doses up to 2,000 IU daily had a small to moderate effect, those who took over 4,000 IU daily had a larger effect.
What’s more, vitamin D supplementation appeared to have a larger effect when taken for less than 12 weeks compared to longer periods of time.
Effects on major depressive disorder and other conditions The researchers noted that vitamin D supplementation had an overall positive effect on the 1,116 subjects diagnosed with major depressive disorder (MDD), also known as clinical depression.
Vitamin D supplements also had a positive effect on depressive symptoms among 407 people with perinatal depression .
The researchers further found that patients who used antidepressants alongside vitamin D supplements experienced small yet statistically significant positive effects.
However, they found placebo was slightly more beneficial than vitamin D supplements in a subgroup of healthy individuals without a diagnosis of clinical depression.
They noted this could be because a reduction in depression symptoms was more challenging to detect when the baseline symptoms levels were already very low in this subgroup.
Vitamin D supplements also had no significant effect on seasonal affective disorder (SAD) among a subgroup of three studies and did not seem to affect depressive symptoms in older adults.
The researchers also acknowledged that their results carry a “very low certainty,” as 36.6% of studies had a high risk of bias, and overall results were very diverse.
Underlying mechanisms may play a role When asked how vitamin D supplementation may be linked to inflammation and depression, Dr. Monique Aucoin, ND, MSc, naturopathic doctor and senior research fellow at the Canadian College of Naturopathic Medicine, not involved in the study, told Medical News Today: “The exact mechanism of how vitamin D impacts the brain and mental health is not entirely clear.
There is evidence that vitamin D may modulate, or balance, parts of the immune system that are involved in inflammation.”
Dr. Aucoin added that an emerging body of evidence suggests that mental health disorders may be related to increased inflammation in the body and that a reduction of inflammation levels may have a therapeutic benefit.
“A 2019 meta-analysis, which combined the results of studies providing vitamin D supplements to participants with depression, reported significant decreases in several laboratory values related to inflammation.
However, it is unclear if these changes were responsible for an antidepressant effect or were simply other benefits that occurred at the same time.”
– Dr. Monique Aucoin, ND, MSc, naturopathic doctor and senior research fellow at the Canadian College of Naturopathic Medicine Tuomas Mikola, a doctoral researcher at the Institute of Clinical Medicine at the University of Eastern Finland and lead author of the study, explained to MNT: “Depression has been associated with low-grade inflammation in the form of elevated cytokine levels.
The body’s innate and adaptive immune responses have been shown to be partially dependent on circulating vitamin D levels.
Hyperactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA axis) and hypersecretion of the stress hormone cortisol are common physiological abnormalities in patients with depression.
Vitamin D may regulate the secretion of cytokines in the immune system and normalize the secretion of cortisol.”
The researchers concluded that further studies should investigate the possible benefits of augmenting standard treatment options for depression with vitamin D supplements.
When asked about the study’s limitations, Dr. Aucoin said that one limitation of the new research is that among the studies with a low risk of bias, no antidepressant effect was observed.
“While these studies make up a small sub-section of the research, it suggests that more high quality studies are needed before clinical recommendations can be made,” she noted.
“The authors of this meta-analysis looked at the data in many different ways to identify which factors (like participant diagnosis, vitamin D status, or vitamin D dosage) impacted the results.
However, because most of the studies had unique combinations of these different factors, it was very hard for the researchers to clearly pinpoint who is most likely to benefit or which dose of vitamin D treatment might be most effective.”
According to Dr. Mikola, another limitation of the new research is that their meta-analyses “focused on change in depressive symptom scores rather than examining the associations between serum vitamin D levels and depressive symptoms.”
“A certain dosage of vitamin D may not increase the circulating concentrations of vitamin D similarly in all participants in heterogeneous populations.”
– Dr. Tuomas Mikola, doctoral researcher at the Institute of Clinical Medicine at the University of Eastern Finland, and lead author of the study
One year of treatment with Duopa, a levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel, led to fast and sustained reductions in motor fluctuations and improved symptom control throughout the day among people with advanced Parkinson’s disease.
That’s according to new analyses of data from a earlier large-scale Phase 3 clinical trial that tested the therapy’s long-term impact.
The new findings have “important implications for improving patients’
[quality of life] and ability to perform [activities of daily living],” the researchers wrote.
Also called carbidopa/levodopa enteral suspension (CLES), Duopa is approved in the U.S. and Europe — where it’s marketed as Duodopa — to treat motor fluctuations in advanced Parkinson’s.
According to the team, the analyses “provide additional context to the longer-term impacts of CLES and supplement prior studies that demonstrated long-term benefits of CLES in real-world populations.”
Recommended Reading GI Dysfunction Can Impair Effects of Duodopa/Duopa
Analyzing Duopa effectiveness in advanced Parkinson’s
The results of the analyses were reported in a study, “ Long-term results of carbidopa/levodopa enteral suspension across the day in advanced Parkinson’s disease: Post-hoc analyses from a large 54-week trial ,” published in Clinical Parkinsonism & Related Disorders.
Oral levodopa is a mainstay treatment for Parkinson’s.
A precursor molecule to dopamine — the signaling molecule that’s deficient in Parkinson’s — levodopa works to restore dopamine levels and ease the disease’s symptoms.
Long-term treatment with levodopa, however, often leads to motor fluctuations and so-called “off” episodes between doses, in which motor symptoms are no longer effectively controlled and re-emerge.
Levodopa is usually co-administered with other medications, such as carbidopa (sold as Sinemet), that help prevent its breakdown and ease side effects.
Duopa, AbbVie’s intestinal gel formulation of the carbidopa-levodopa combination, is delivered continuously for 16 hours via a portable infusion pump connected directly into the small intestine.
As such, the therapy is expected to help shorten “off” periods and offer more consistent levodopa levels in the blood for people with advanced Parkinson’s who experience significant motor fluctuations.
A previous AbbVie-sponsored, open-label Phase 3 clinical trial (NCT00335153) evaluated the safety and tolerability of Duopa in 354 Parkinson’s patients, ages 30 and older.
All participants had severe motor fluctuations, defined as three hours of “off” time daily despite optimized treatment with available oral medications.
Participants were enrolled at 86 centers in 16 countries, and the trial was carried out between January 2008 and June 2012.
Following a screening period, tube placement, and optimization of the treatment, patients received Duopa for 54 weeks, or just over a year.
Results showed that Duopa treatment significantly decreased patients’ total daily “off” time by 4.4 hours — a 65.6% drop — when compared with the period before starting treatment.
Patients also saw significant improvements in activities of daily living and quality of life.
Looking at the long-term
The newly published study was a post-hoc analysis — meaning one carried out after the trial was completed — conducted to further investigate the treatment’s effects on motor fluctuations.
The analysis included 289 of the study’s participants, for whom a 24-hour home diary of motor status was available at study’s start (baseline) and for at least one time point after treatment initiation.
Patients recorded their motor state in 30-minute increments throughout the day, over a three-day period prior to each clinical visit: baseline and weeks 4, 12, 24, 36, and 54.
These states included asleep, “off” periods, and “on” periods.
“On” phases were classified as those times with either with troublesome involuntary movements, or dyskinesia, or without it (ON-woTD).
Dyskinesia is a symptom commonly associated with long-term levodopa use.
The patients’ mean age was 63.9 at the study’s start and 57.8% were men.
Overall, the participants were experiencing an average of 6.75 “off” hours per day at baseline.
Results showed that after four weeks of treatment with Duodopa, patients were nearly two times more likely to achieve ON-woTD after waking up compared with baseline.
These odds continued to improve, ranging from 2.23–2.51, up to one year and remaining statistically significant relative to baseline.
The average time to reaching ON-woTD after waking also was significantly reduced at all time points, declining from 108 minutes, or nearly two hours, at the study’s start to 51 minutes after one year.
Patients also were able to maintain this steady-state for longer intervals when using Duodopa.
Specifically, the mean duration of ON-woTD time across four-hour intervals during the day significantly increased from a range of 93–119 minutes (about 1.5–two hours) at baseline to 157–197 minutes (about 2.5–three hours) at week 54.
In contrast, the duration of time spent in the “off” phase significantly and steadily decreased, from 85–106 minutes (1.5–1.75 hours) every four hours at baseline to 17–44 minutes after one year.
“By allowing patients to reach ON-woTD significantly faster in the morning and maintaining this benefit over longer duration, CLES has the potential to increase patients’ independence in [activities of daily living], reduce caregiver burden, and improve patients’
[quality of life],” the researchers wrote.
In addition, patients generally experienced significantly fewer motor-state transitions when using Duodopa — about half as many relative to baseline — as well as fewer extreme motor fluctuations.
Altogether, this reflected better motor symptom control.
Of note, the percentage of patients who experienced an extreme fluctuation was reduced from 31.8% at baseline to 10.8% after four weeks of treatment and 7.6% after a year.
“Our longitudinal analyses of daily patterns support the long-term effectiveness of CLES in increasing time to ON-woTD onset after waking, improving motor-symptom control as measured by motor-states’ duration throughout the day, and reducing motor-state transitions and extreme fluctuations,” the team wrote.
“Treatments that provide consistent motor-state stability or minimize daily motor-state transitions may have important implications for patients’ and caregivers’
[quality of life],” the researchers added.
Additional studies of Duopa’s effects on motor fluctuations should be conducted in real-world populations, the team noted.
Nearly 18 months after getting COVID-19 and spending weeks in the hospital, Terry Bell struggles with hanging up his shirts and pants after doing the laundry.
Lifting his clothes, raising his arms, arranging items in his closet leave Bell short of breath and often trigger severe fatigue.
He walks with a cane, only short distances.
He's 50 pounds lighter than when the virus struck.
Bell, 70, is among millions of older adults who have grappled with long COVID — a population that has received little attention even though research suggests seniors are more likely to develop the poorly understood condition than younger or middle-aged adults.
Long COVID refers to ongoing or new health problems that occur at least four weeks after a COVID infection, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Much about the condition is baffling: There is no diagnostic test to confirm it, no standard definition of the ailment, and no way to predict who will be affected.
Common symptoms, which can last months or years, include fatigue, shortness of breath, an elevated heart rate, muscle and joint pain, sleep disruptions, and problems with attention, concentration, language, and memory — a set of difficulties known as brain fog.
Ongoing inflammation or a dysfunctional immune response may be responsible, along with reservoirs of the virus that remain in the body, small blood clots, or residual damage to the heart, lungs, vascular system, brain, kidneys, or other organs.
Only now is the impact on older adults beginning to be documented.
In the largest study of its kind, published recently in the journal BMJ, researchers estimated that 32% of older adults in the U.S. who survived COVID infections had symptoms of long COVID up to four months after infection — more than double the 14% rate an earlier study found in adults ages 18 to 64.
(Other studies suggest symptoms can last much longer, for a year or more.)
The BMJ study examined more than 87,000 adults 65 and older who had COVID infections in 2020, drawing on claims data from UnitedHealth Group's Medicare Advantage plans.
It included symptoms that lasted 21 days or more after an infection, a shorter period than the CDC uses in its long COVID definition.
The data encompasses both older adults who were hospitalized because of COVID (27%) and those who were not (73%).
The higher rate of post-COVID symptoms in older adults is likely due to a higher incidence of chronic disease and physical vulnerability in this population — traits that have led to a greater burden of serious illness, hospitalization, and death among seniors throughout the pandemic.
"On average, older adults are less resilient.
They don't have the same ability to bounce back from serious illness," said Dr. Ken Cohen, a co-author of the study and executive director of translational research for Optum Care.
Optum Care is a network of physician practices owned by UnitedHealth Group.
Applying the study's findings to the latest data from the CDC suggests that up to 2.5 million older adults may have been affected by long COVID.
For those individuals, the consequences can be devastating: the onset of disability, the inability to work, reduced ability to carry out activities of daily life, and a lower quality of life.
But in many seniors, long COVID is difficult to recognize.
"The challenge is that nonspecific symptoms such as fatigue, weakness, pain, confusion, and increased frailty are things we often see in seriously ill older adults.
Or people may think, 'That's just part of aging,'" said Dr. Charles Thomas Alexander Semelka, a postdoctoral fellow in geriatric medicine at Wake Forest University.
Ann Morse, 72, of Nashville, Tennessee, was diagnosed with COVID in November 2020 and recovered at home after a trip to the emergency room and follow-up home visits from nurses every few days.
She soon began having trouble with her memory, attention, and speech, as well as sleep problems and severe fatigue.
Though she's improved somewhat, several cognitive issues and fatigue persist to this day.
"What was frustrating was I would tell people my symptoms and they'd say, 'Oh, we're like that too,' as if this was about getting older," she told me.
"And I'm like, but this happened to me suddenly, almost overnight.
"
Bell, a singer-songwriter in Nashville, had a hard time getting adequate follow-up attention after spending two weeks in intensive care and an additional five weeks in a nursing home receiving rehabilitation therapy.
"I wasn't getting answers from my regular doctors about my breathing and other issues.
They said take some over-the-counter medications for your sinus and things like that," he said.
Bell said his real recovery began after he was recommended to specialists at Vanderbilt University Medical Center.
James Jackson, director of long-term outcomes at Vanderbilt's Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction, and Survivorship Center, runs several long COVID support groups that Morse and Bell attend and has worked with hundreds of similar patients.
He estimates that about a third of those who are older have some degree of cognitive impairment.
"We know there are significant differences between younger and older brains.
Younger brains are more plastic and effective at reconstituting, and our younger patients seem able to regain their cognitive functioning more quickly," he said.
In extreme cases, COVID infections can lead to dementia.
That may be because older adults who are severely ill with COVID are at high risk of developing delirium — an acute and sudden change in mental status — which is associated with the subsequent development of dementia, said Dr. Liron Sinvani, a geriatrician and an assistant professor at Northwell Health's Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research in Manhasset, New York.
Older patients' brains also may have been injured from oxygen deprivation or inflammation.
Or disease processes that underlie dementia may already have been underway, and a COVID infection may serve as a tipping point, hastening the emergence of symptoms.
Research conducted by Sinvani and colleagues, published in March, found that 13% of COVID patients who were 65 and older and hospitalized at Northwell Health in March 2020 or April 2020 had evidence of dementia a year later.
Dr. Thomas Gut, associate chair of medicine at Staten Island University Hospital, which opened one of the first long COVID clinics in the U.S., observed that becoming ill with COVID can push older adults with preexisting conditions such as heart failure or lung disease "over the edge" to a more severe impairment.
In older adults especially, he said, "it's hard to attribute what's directly related to COVID and what's a progression of conditions they already have.
"
That wasn't true for Richard Gard, 67, who lives just outside New Haven, Connecticut, a self-described "very healthy and fit" sailor, scuba diver, and music teacher at Yale University who contracted COVID in March 2020.
He was the first COVID patient treated at Yale New Haven Hospital, where he was critically ill for 2½ weeks, including five days in intensive care and three days on a ventilator.
In the two years since, Gard has spent more than two months in the hospital, usually for symptoms that resemble a heart attack.
"If I tried to walk up the stairs or 10 feet, I would almost pass out with exhaustion, and the symptoms would start — extreme chest pain radiating up my arm into my neck, trouble breathing, sweating," he said.
Dr. Erica Spatz, director of the preventive cardiovascular health program at Yale, is one of Gard's physicians.
"The more severe the COVID infection and the older you are, the more likely it is you'll have a cardiovascular complication after," she said.
Complications include weakening of the heart muscle, blood clots, abnormal heart rhythms, vascular system damage, and high blood pressure.
Gard's life has changed in ways he never imagined.
Unable to work, he takes 22 medications and can still walk only 10 minutes on level ground.
Post-traumatic stress disorder is a frequent, unwanted companion.
"A lot of times it's been difficult to go on, but I tell myself I just have to get up and try one more time," he told me.
"Every day that I get a little bit better, I tell myself I'm adding another day or week to my life.
"
We're eager to hear from readers about questions you'd like answered, problems you've been having with your care and advice you need in dealing with the health care system.
Visit khn.org/columnists to submit your requests or tips.
KHN (Kaiser Health News) is a national newsroom that produces in-depth journalism about health issues.
Together with Policy Analysis and Polling, KHN is one of the three major operating programs at KFF (Kaiser Family Foundation).
KFF is an endowed nonprofit organization providing information on health issues to the nation.
Subscribe to KHN's free Morning Briefing.
Save
'COVID-toes,' tracking dermatological symptoms of COVID-19
By Rebecca L. Forand Add topic to email alerts Receive an email when new articles are posted on .
Please provide your email address to receive an email when new articles are posted on Subscribe Added to email alerts You've successfully added to your alerts.
You will receive an email when new content is published.
Click Here to Manage Email Alerts You've successfully added to your alerts.
You will receive an email when new content is published.
Click Here to Manage Email Alerts
Back to Healio
We were unable to process your request.
Please try again later.
If you continue to have this issue please contact customerservice@slackinc.com.
Back to Healio
Esther E. Freeman
As the world continues to struggle with the COVID-19 pandemic, new symptoms of the virus continue to be identified.
One such symptom, purple or red lesions on the toes and hands, has been dubbed “COVID toes” and has gained attention over recent weeks.
Healio spoke with Esther E. Freeman, MD, PhD, director of global dermatology at Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, and a member of the American Academy of Dermatology’s COVID-19 task force, about what dermatologists should look for in patients with COVID-19, how to address dermatologic symptoms and a new registry from the AAD tracking COVID-19’s dermatologic symptoms.
Q.
How did the idea of a dermatology-related registry for COVID-19 symptoms begin?
A. Even before we started hearing any reports about dermatologic manifestations of COVID-19, we were wondering about how we could better understand what would happen to our existing dermatologic patients who contracted Covid-19.
In particular, we were concerned about patients who were on biologics, or those with preexisting dermatologic conditions such as psoriasis, eczema or lupus, to name a few.
We appreciated collaboration from the Global Rheumatology Alliance, who had launched a similar database for Rheumatology and helped share their experience with us.
While we were building the registry, we started hearing more and more reports about different skin manifestations in COVID-19, and we realized the registry was capable of collecting all of this data at the same time.
In terms of viruses and their effect on the skin, in dermatology we are used to viruses causing different viral rashes and eruptions.
It was certainly not out of the ordinary for any of us to think there may be some viral rashes that we would end up seeing with COVID-19, like we see with many other viruses.
But what has been more surprising is these increasing reports around these pernio-like lesions of the toes.
As the world continues to struggle with the COVID-19 pandemic, new symptoms of the virus continue to be identified.
One such symptom, purple or red lesions on the toes and hands, has been dubbed “COVID toes” and has gained attention over recent weeks.
Q.
What are COVID toes, and what should patients do if they notice them?
A. Pernio, a condition where you get red or purple tender bumps on the fingers or toes, also known as chilblains, is usually a reaction to cold temperatures.
In COVID-19, I prefer to call it “pernio-like” rather pernio, since we don’t yet know if it’s truly the same process.
A lot of these patients adamantly deny being exposed to any sort of cold temperatures whatsoever.
These skin lesions have been dubbed “COVID toes.”
What patients are experiencing are red or purple bumps on their toes or hands, as well as a burning sensation, often with pain and tenderness.
The good news is it seems to go away after about 2-3 weeks.
For the most part, we have seen this in young and relatively healthy patients, both in children and adults.
So, I want to emphasize I do not want people to panic and think “Oh I have purple toes, I’m going to go on a ventilator.”
While we have had a few reports of sicker patients that have developed this finding, for the most part, that is not what we have been seeing.
I recommend concerned individuals contact their board-certified dermatologist or their primary care doctor to discuss if they are concerned about new onset of toe lesions.
There are other conditions that can cause something similar, so you will want someone to evaluate you and go through a thorough medical history.
Q.
What should dermatologists be on the lookout for in terms of COVID toes, or how should they react when patients report them?
A. One of the challenges around these lesions is that our knowledge is continuing to evolve around how we counsel patients regarding quarantine at this time.
People should be following CDC and local guidelines in terms of self-isolating, regardless.
We know that some patients who develop the pernio-like lesions of their feet are still infectious, because they are testing PCR positive for the virus.
This means that there is a potential risk of transmitting the virus to others.
It seems that some people may develop these lesions while they are still infectious, while others may develop them somewhat later in the disease course.
We need more data on the timing of these pernio-like lesions so we can better guide our providers on how to counsel their patients.
That is an area we are actively working on.
This has public health implications because if your patient is potentially still infectious when their toes are purple, that is a different story than if they are not infectious and they are already basically over the infectious stage of the virus.
PAGE BREAK
Q.
What other dermatologic manifestations are being reported in patients with COVID-19?
A. COVID toes are kind of stealing the spotlight, but about half our registry is conditions other than these pernio-like lesions of the feet and hands.
We are seeing other virally induced rashes and eruptions such as morbilliform, also known as measles-like eruptions, and urticaria, also known as hives, among many others.
One of challenges is that patients with COVID-19 are often on multiple medications, and so when a rash develops it can be hard to sort out whether the skin findings are related to a medication or to the virus itself.
Q. What is the Dermatology COVID-19 registry, and what are its main goals and objectives?
A. It is an international registry, with data housed at Massachusetts General Hospital, in collaboration with the American Academy of Dermatology and the International League of Dermatology Societies.
The first goal is to collect dermatologic manifestations of COVID-19.
Right now, we are collecting both lab-confirmed cases and suspected COVID-19 because we recognize that patients do not always have access to testing.
We stratify registry analysis based on whether people have had laboratory confirmation of the virus or not.
The second group of patients we are interested in are those who have preexisting dermatologic conditions.
We are interested in what happens to those patients if they develop COVID.
We are collaborating with a number of disease-specific registries around the world in this particular area.
The third group is made up of patients on existing dermatologic medications, for example biologics, immunossuppressives, or other dermatologic medications such as isotretinoin, who then develop COVID-19.
Q. What are some of the registry’s limitations?
A.
The registry is essentially a giant case series.
It is not a large epidemiologic study, a cohort study or a case control study.
We will not be able to tell the incidence or prevalence of any of these dermatologic conditions.
I cannot look at this cohort and tell you, “X percent of COVID patients will have dermatologic findings.”
The registry is helpful for hypotheses generation and for people reporting unique findings.
We are able to collect cases from around the world, but it has its limitations in that we cannot assign causation.
Q.
How would someone use the registry?
A. It is a health care provider-facing database.
This means we ask that patients do not enter their own information.
You do not have to be a dermatologist to enter the information; we are also taking reports from healthcare providers from any field, which includes front-line health care providers or primary care doctors who are taking care of COVID patients.
Entering a case takes about 5 minutes.
It is de-identified.
There is no protected health information that goes into the registry, and the data are securely housed in the REDCap platform at Massachusetts General Hospital.
We appreciate all of our colleagues that have already entered cases.
We are all learning about the effects of this virus together.
Information can be added at www.aad.org/covidregistry.
– by Rebecca L. Forand
Disclosures: Freeman reports no relevant financial disclosures.
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) can make you feel as if your energy has been zapped — it’s a level of fatigue that people who don’t have AS often can't understand.
Any form of arthritis can cause the kind of pain that keeps you awake at night, but fatigue that accompanies inflammatory forms of arthritis — such as ankylosing spondylitis and rheumatoid arthritis — is also caused by the inflammation process itself.
"Fatigue from inflammation in ankylosing spondylitis can feel like you have the flu.
You can ache all over," says Rochelle Rosian, MD, the director of regional rheumatology at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio.
“That’s because inflammation affects your whole body, not just your joints.”
Here’s what you should know about what causes fatigue in AS, and what you can do to give yourself the best chance of avoiding or reducing this symptom.
Ankylosing Spondylitis Fatigue Factors
Fatigue appears to be very common in people with ankylosing spondylitis.
In a study published in March 2020 in the journal Clinical Rheumatology, 150 participants with AS completed a series of questionnaires.
The results showed that 47.8 percent of them experienced fatigue, with certain factors making fatigue more likely — including higher AS disease activity and sleep disturbances.
People with severe fatigue reported a lower quality of life.
Not everyone with ankylosing spondylitis experiences fatigue.
Fatigue is related to many factors — not just AS disease activity or pain and sleep difficulty, but also psychological factors like depression and anxiety.
"Fatigue caused by pain is easy to understand," Dr. Rosian says.
"Pain itself is exhausting, and if you have pain at night, it’s hard to sleep well.
But the fatigue of inflammation is not just in your head — it’s due to a cascade of inflammatory reactions that affect your whole body.
"
Several factors can contribute to fatigue in AS, according to the Spondylitis Association of America.
Inflammation Uncontrolled systemic (body-wide) inflammation is the factor that best predicts fatigue in AS.
Cell messengers called cytokines that are part of the inflammatory process may cause the sensation of fatigue, and inflammation can also cause anemia (inadequate red blood cells), which also causes fatigue.
Lack of sleep and inactivity As tired as you may be, sleep can be elusive if you experience pain and stiffness due to AS.
And the longer you're not moving, the more pain and stiffness you may develop.
"You may fall asleep without pain and then wake up at night or early in the morning with pain," Rosian notes.
Depression Having a potentially painful and unpredictable condition like AS can lead to stress, despair, and depression.
Depression may cause fatigue directly by lowering levels of serotonin — a hormone that helps with nervous system communication — as well as other key hormones.
It may also lead to insomnia and other sleep disturbances.
Tips to Ease Ankylosing Spondylitis Fatigue
"One of the best ways to ease the fatigue of ankylosing spondylitis is to keep moving," Rosian says.
"I tell my patients that rest is rust.
Regular exercise helps reduce pain and inflammation, helps you sleep better, and helps ease fatigue.
"
In addition to getting enough physical activity, these steps may help you fight fatigue in AS.
Talk to your doctor about your treatment plan.
Severe fatigue could be a sign that your ankylosing spondylitis medication isn’t working as well as it should.
Always let your doctor know about your fatigue symptoms, and ask if your symptoms or tests measuring AS disease activity suggest that your treatment should be changed or intensified.
Severe fatigue could be a sign that your ankylosing spondylitis medication isn’t working as well as it should.
Always let your doctor know about your fatigue symptoms, and ask if your symptoms or tests measuring AS disease activity suggest that your treatment should be changed or intensified.
Try physical therapy.
A physical therapist can show you ways to move that require less energy and cause less fatigue.
Physical therapy may also help ease pain, a key contributor to fatigue in AS.
If you are not yet working with a physical therapist, ask your doctor for a referral.
A physical therapist can show you ways to move that require less energy and cause less fatigue.
Physical therapy may also help ease pain, a key contributor to fatigue in AS.
If you are not yet working with a physical therapist, ask your doctor for a referral.
Get serious about pain management.
There isn’t a magic treatment for pain related to AS, and no single approach works for everyone.
But if you experience pain more than occasionally, work with your doctor to develop a comprehensive plan to tackle your pain.
This plan may include medications, exercise, and physical therapy, or even less-conventional therapies like meditation, yoga, or breathing exercises.
There isn’t a magic treatment for pain related to AS, and no single approach works for everyone.
But if you experience pain more than occasionally, work with your doctor to develop a comprehensive plan to tackle your pain.
This plan may include medications, exercise, and physical therapy, or even less-conventional therapies like meditation, yoga, or breathing exercises.
Eat for energy.
To have the energy you need to fight fatigue, feed your body a healthy diet of lean proteins, healthy fats, fruits, vegetables, and whole grains.
And don’t skip meals — start every day with a good breakfast.
Talk to your doctor about whether you should also take any supplements to boost your energy level, such as B vitamins or omega-3 fatty acids.
To have the energy you need to fight fatigue, feed your body a healthy diet of lean proteins, healthy fats, fruits, vegetables, and whole grains.
And don’t skip meals — start every day with a good breakfast.
Talk to your doctor about whether you should also take any supplements to boost your energy level, such as B vitamins or omega-3 fatty acids.
Set the right mood for sleep.
Try sticking to a sleep schedule and a soothing bedtime routine.
Go to bed around the same time each night, and try a warm bath or some gentle stretching to relax before bed instead of watching TV or checking your phone.
Try sticking to a sleep schedule and a soothing bedtime routine.
Go to bed around the same time each night, and try a warm bath or some gentle stretching to relax before bed instead of watching TV or checking your phone.
Ask for help.
If fatigue, poor sleep, or depression are taking a toll and you’re struggling to break out of the slump, ask your doctor for a referral to a mental health professional.
Psychotherapy (talk therapy), with or without depression medications, will help to improve your mood and quality of life.
Fatigue is one of the most challenging symptoms of ankylosing spondylitis, and can make you feel powerless at times.
But don’t forget that many fatigue-fighting measures are under your control, and that AS disease activity is the number one predictor of fatigue in people with the condition.
If fatigue is bringing you down, have a talk with your doctor about the state of your AS — including your level of inflammation — and what therapies and strategies are available to get you to a better, more energetic place.
Additional reporting by Quinn Phillips.
OCD symptoms and common signs of OCD, types of OCD, its causes and treatment and how to tell it from OCPD.
OCD symptoms and common signs of OCD, types of OCD, its causes and treatment and how to tell it from OCPD.
Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) symptoms are more than just being fastidious about cleaning or checking the oven is off.
People with OCD symptoms normally have unreasonable fears (called obsessions) which they try to reduce by performing certain behaviours (called compulsions).
People with OCD symptoms feel compelled to perform these actions, even if they don’t want to.
OCD is thought to affect around 2.3 percent of people at some point in their lives.
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder symptoms
Most people develop OCD symptoms before they are twenty-years-old.
Perhaps the most familiar example of OCD symptoms is people repeatedly washing their hands (a compulsion) to avoid getting a disease (an obsession).
That said, though, some people are considered to have OCD despite ‘only’ having obsessions or ‘only’ having compulsions.
Around 70 percent have both obsessions and compulsions, 20 percent just obsessions and 10 percent compulsions alone.
As with most psychological problems, OCD symptoms involves normal fears which are taken to extreme.
It’s perfectly normal to be worried about disease, but extremely inconvenient to wash your hands 300 times a day.
Both obsessions and compulsions are a matter of degree.
Once OCD symptoms are causing problems in everyday life, it needs addressing.
Common OCD signs
Here are some common obsessions:
Need for orderliness and symmetry.
Fear of dirt or contamination by germs.
Excessive doubt.
Fear of sinful or evil thoughts.
Fear of making a mistake.
Fear of harming another person.
Thinking about acting inappropriately or shouting obscenities.
Here are some typical compulsions:
Getting mentally ‘stuck’ on certain images or thoughts that won’t go away.
Repeated hand-washing, showering or bathing.
Repeating particular words or phrases.
Always arranging things in a certain way.
Constant counting during routine tasks, whether mentally or out loud.
Performing tasks a certain number of times.
Always checking things like locks or ovens.
Collecting or hoarding things with no value.
Most people are fully aware that their thoughts and/or behaviours are unreasonable, some are not.
Stress normally makes the symptoms of OCD worse.
Around one-third of people also make repeated sudden movements or sounds.
These are called ‘tics’.
OCD symptoms: mixing up fantasy and reality
Confusing imagination with reality and being out of contact with reality are two further OCD symptoms (Paradisis et al., 2016).
People with OCD are known to dissociate themselves from reality.
Instead they rely heavily on their imagination.
People with OCD tend to experience ‘inferential confusion’: essentially getting fantasy and reality mixed up.
Dr Frederick Aardema, who has researched this OCD symptom, said:
“It seems that people with OCD are so absorbed by their obsession due to inferential confusion that there is a break with reality.
Specifically, we found that individuals no longer rely on their sensory perceptions or common sense but on their imagination.
For example, they are afraid that their hands are contaminated with germs, so they wash them over and over again because they are convinced that their hands are dirty even though they are visibly clean.”
Types of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
Some of the different types of OCD include:
contamination OCD,
scrupulosity OCD,
checking OCD,
symptomatic OCD,
perfectionism OCD,
sexual intrusive thoughts,
and harming intrusive thoughts.
All OCD symptoms driven by fears (for example, of dirt or breaking a moral code) or intrusive thoughts (such as that they might suddenly commit a violent act).
What causes Obsessive Compulsive Disorder?
It’s not known exactly what causes OCD symptoms, but it’s likely a combination of genetic and environmental factors.
In other words: it runs in the family and it’s likely brought on by stress.
How to reduce OCD symptoms
Adaptive coping skills are the best way for people with obsessive compulsive disorder to reduce OCD symptoms, research finds (Moritz et al., 2018).
Typical adaptive coping skills include problem-solving and acceptance.
People who cope adaptively with OCD symptoms tend to seek support from others, eat properly, exercise regularly and anticipate stressful episodes.
Treatments for OCD symptoms
Typically, people are treated with medication and cognitive-behavioural therapy for OCD symptoms.
There’s some question over whether medication really helps much.
Psychological therapies, though, are usually helpful for OCD symptoms (Melin et al., 2020).
Therapy often involves learning to tolerate anxiety without performing the ritualised behaviour.
However, some people need to combine antidepressants with cognitive-behavioural therapy in order to respond to treatment and reduce OCD symptoms.
CBT involves a variety of techniques including cognitive restructuring, relaxation techniques, behavioural experiments and exposure therapy.
CBT works by targeting both a person’s thoughts and their behaviours.
While most people are not cured, the majority can learn to manage the symptoms and live a normal life.
After treatment, most people see a substantial reduction in their symptoms.
OCPD vs OCD
Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) is often mixed up with having an obsessive personality.
People with obsessive personalities may, for example, like to have their books arranged alphabetically, without having OCD.
The sign that someone really has OCD is that their behaviours are driven by fear or intrusive thoughts that they are trying to get rid of.
OCD is most definitely not something sufferers derive any pleasure or satisfaction from.
Dr Elizabeth McIngvale, an expert on OCD symptoms, explains:
“Obsessive compulsive personality disorder, in my opinion, is often what society thinks OCD is.
People with OCPD might organize their closet perfectly, have all of their items color-coded and organized by type or category, or if you open their fridge all of their labels are lined up perfectly and everything has a place.
However, individuals with OCPD often talk about the fact that there’s not an unwanted, intrusive thought and there’s no fear attached to these behaviors.
They just organize things a certain way or do these kind of compulsive behaviors because it makes them feel better.
However, with OCD, it is something that individuals don’t enjoy – there’s nothing they like about it, they are doing it because they feel like they have to in order to get rid of the intrusive thought or fear.
It is debilitating and draining and not something that makes the individual feel better and more productive when they are done.”
.
A new report suggests that two-thirds of people who have prolonged symptoms of COVID-19 are able to return to work by 22 months, though most continue to deal with effects of the disease.
The study adds new data to what has become one of the thorniest problems in the pandemic era—how to treat patients with what has become known as “long COVID.”
The study was published in the Journal of Clinical Medicine.
Cases of long COVID are generally characterized by persistent post-infection symptoms that cannot be explained by any other diagnosis.
To qualify as “long,” the symptoms must persist for 3 months after confirmed COVID-19 infection, or 2 months after the acute disease phase.
Corresponding author Bernard Geny, MD, PhD, of the University of Strasbourg, in France, and colleagues, said diagnosing long COVID can be challenging.
“Indeed, many patients suffering from post-COVID-19 condition might also demonstrate several and potentially serious comorbidities, making the link between symptoms and COVID infection difficult to discern,” he wrote, along with colleagues.
The prevalence of long COVID is not known, though the number of people with long-lasting symptoms could be as high as 1 in 10, the authors noted.
Not all of those patients experience severe or disabling symptoms, however.
Many patients with long-lasting symptoms have reported in previous research that they do not feel they have adequate support from the healthcare system.
For its part, Geny and colleagues said healthcare providers do not yet have a clear model of optimal care for these patients.
In the new study, the investigators decided to track and interview patients with persistent COVID-19 symptoms to see what happened to their symptoms over time, and whether they could return to work.
Between the study period of September 2021 and March 2022, the investigators contacted 45 people whose COVID-19 cases were referred to them.
An advanced practice nurse with COVID-19 expertise called the patients, collected basic health parameters, and interviewed them using a structured set of questions.
The interviews included questions about both physical and mental health, and the nurses proposed possible therapeutic interventions.
The team then made a second phone call, months later, to see how the patients’ symptoms changed and to find out if they had been able to return to work.
The phone calls were made at 15 and 22 months after infection, the authors said.
The investigators found that most people referred to their care coordination team were self-referrals (45%), with physician referrals comprising just 27% of cases.
The rest came from the team’s own proactive contacts or from a regional support platform.
The most common symptoms of long COVID—fatigue, neurocognitive disorders, and muscle and joint pain—generally did not resolve over the study period, the authors said, despite interventions such as exercise, therapy, and psychological support.
However, patients did report significant improvement in dyspnea, anxiety, and chest pain.
Overall, 53% of patients in the study reported symptom improvement, but only 9% said their symptoms resolved.
Still, two-thirds of patients said they had sufficient improvement of symptoms to return to work, either part-time or full-time.
One difficulty understanding the pathology of long COVID is the fact that many patients had significant comorbidities, the authors said, meaning that the impact of COVID-19 infection needed to be measured in terms of worsening symptoms, rather than new symptoms.
“When talking about post-COVID-19 condition, there is a lack of data reporting reduced functions and activity in the participants compared to the previous ones, i.e., before SARS-CoV-2 infection, and further studies will be useful to investigate such issues,” they wrote.
The authors also said psychological factors might sometimes be at play, given that some of the longest-lasting symptoms are subjective (fatigue and pain, for instance).
But they conceded that such ideas are controversial and the idea is poorly received by patients.
Still, Geny and colleagues said clinicians should think about offering psychological and physical support in tandem, rather than seeing them as opposing strategies.
Finally, though their patient interventions were meant to collect data, the investigators found that patients appreciated the contact from the nurses.
“In such complex situations, besides early and adapted rehabilitations and psychological help allowing better symptom management, relatively simple actions such as a phone call might be very useful to reduce patients’ feelings of abandonment,” they concluded.
Emotional dysregulation — or the inability to properly modulate and regulate emotions — is often seen in people with ADHD, starting in childhood and lasting well into adulthood.
However, it isn’t listed as a symptom of ADHD in the DSM-V, which has increasingly focused on hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention.
New research — and a new report based on long-term studies of ADHD — aims to change that.
The report, presented by Philip Asherson, Ph.D., at the Fifth World Congress on Attention Deficit, posits that while emotional instability is not unique to people with ADHD, it presents a “unique source of impairment in these patients,” and should be treated as a core symptom of the disorder — particularly because it responds so well to treatment.
Emotional dysregulation used to be considered a core symptom of ADHD, Asherson noted.
However, as physicians (and the DSM) started to concentrate more on hyperactivity and inattention, emotional symptoms were phased out of diagnostic protocol.
This is bad news for ADHD patients, Dr. Asherson says, since emotional difficulties contribute extensively to impairments in home life, school settings, and careers.
To support his theory that emotional instability is a core part of ADHD — and that it can be treated — Asherson and his team examined prisoners with ADHD, placing some of them on methylphenidate and assessing their improvement after 12 weeks.
For the vast majority of the prisoners, there was significant improvement on all aspects of the Conners Adult ADHD Rating Scale, which covers symptoms of inattention and hyperactivity.
Asherson’s team also measured emotional symptoms using the Emotional Dysregulation Scale of the Wender-Reimherr Interview for Adult ADHD.
After 12 weeks of taking methylphenidate — with no additional medication or therapy strategies — the prisoners all showed significant improvement on emotional symptoms as well, indicating that emotional dysregulation responds to standard ADHD treatment as well as hyperactivity and inattention symptoms do.
Asherson acknowledges that emotional dysregulation is not unique to ADHD — in fact, it’s common to many mental health disorders.
But its prevalence in ADHD patients can give doctors an additional piece of the puzzle when attempting to tease out a complex diagnosis.
“As a clinician, and particularly in adult psychiatry, where people are less familiar with ADHD, if they see mood instability, they’ll often be thinking [mood disorders] or personality disorder,” Asherson said.
“They forget that ADHD can also cause it.”
Antibiotics do not treat viruses but are only effective against bacterial infections.
People with COVID-19 may receive antibiotics to treat secondary bacterial infections.
Researchers are currently carrying out investigations to see if other drugs could be potential treatment options for COVID-19.
Here, we look at the role of antibiotics in COVID-19, the latest research into other potential medications, and the current treatment available for COVID-19.
Can antibiotics treat COVID-19?
Share on Pinterest Antibiotics can only treat bacterial infections.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO) , antibiotics are not effective in the treatment of COVID-19, which the new coronavirus causes.
Antibiotics can only treat bacterial infections, not viruses.
If people are receiving hospital treatment for COVID-19, doctors may prescribe antibiotics for secondary bacterial infections.
Are antibiotics being investigated as treatment options?
Azithromycin is an antibiotic that researchers are currently investigating as a potential treatment option for COVID-19.
Azithromycin has anti-inflammatory effects, which may help reduce an overactive immune response to COVID-19.
Research has also found azithromycin to have positive effects against Zika and Ebola viruses in test tube experiments.
Azithromycin is also effective in preventing severe bacterial respiratory tract infections in children with viral infections.
Researchers are looking into the effects of the combination of hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malarial drug, and azithromycin.
Research has found hydroxychloroquine to have anti-SARS-CoV activity in test tube experiments.
One small scale study looked at the effects of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin on people receiving hospital treatment for COVID-19 in France.
The results showed hydroxychloroquine significantly reduced the viral load or eliminated the coronavirus.
The addition of azithromycin increased the effectiveness of hydroxychloroquine.
However, another study from the American College of Cardiology found that treatment with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin did not improve outcomes, and increased the risk of cardiac arrest.
The study looked at 1,438 people receiving hospital treatment for COVID-19 in New York.
All participants had similar age, race, and time of starting treatment.
Since then, the FDA has revoked the emergency use authorization for hydroxycholoroquine, so people and doctors should not use it to treat COVID-19 anymore.
Why do doctors prescribe antibiotics to those with COVID-19?
The new coronavirus causes a respiratory infection that can weaken the immune system.
This impact can increase the risk of getting a bacterial infection, which the individual may find harder to fight off.
Doctors may prescribe antibiotics to people with COVID-19 to prevent or treat secondary bacterial infections, such as bacterial pneumonia.
Doctors may then use antibiotics as part of the treatment to fight the infection.
What are the treatment options available?
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not approved any drugs for the specific treatment of COVID-19.
Current treatments depend on the severity of each case and focus on treating symptoms and complications of COVID-19.
For mild symptoms, people may be able to treat COVID-19 with home remedies.
These can include: getting plenty of rest
drinking plenty of fluids to stay well hydrated
fever and pain relief medication, such as acetaminophen
monitor symptoms, and contacting a doctor straight away if they worsen Current treatment options for people hospitalized with COVID-19 can include: intravenous fluids to prevent dehydration
oxygen supply if people have difficulty breathing
treating any complications, such as pneumonia
antiviral drug remdesivir for emergency cases of COVID-19 Researchers are also looking into a range of existing drugs as potential treatments.
These medications include: anti-malarial drugs
drugs for autoimmune conditions
antiviral drugs that are effective for other viruses
convalescent plasma, using antibodies from people who have recovered from COVID-19
high doses of intravenous vitamin C Further tests and trials will help to determine whether any of these options could be potential treatment options for COVID-19.
Symptoms and when to see a doctor According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), symptoms for COVID-19 can appear 2–14 days after exposure to the new coronavirus.
Symptoms can include the following: cough
fever or chills
shortness of breath
difficulty breathing
fatigue
body aches or muscle aches
headache
loss of smell
loss of taste
sore throat
blocked or runny nose
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea People should contact their doctor if they have severe symptoms or symptoms worsen.
People will need to seek immediate medical attention if they have any of the following symptoms: difficulty breathing
continual chest pain or pressure
new state of confusion
unable to stay awake or to waken
blue tinge to lips or face People can call 911 and notify the operator that the person may have symptoms of COVID-19.
At the time of writing, the novel coronavirus has already infected close to 37 million people worldwide and caused more than 1 million deaths.
It is important to understand that even with the record-breaking efforts of the scientific community and medical experts across the globe, a safe and effective vaccine still seems at least four to six months away.
Also, after acquiring the required permissions from regulatory authorities, the whole logistics of distribution and inoculation of at least 70 per cent population of the world still needs to be figured out.
It is a humongous task which may take a few years at the very least and requires immense co-operation and understanding between various nations, stakeholders, vaccine distributors and drugmakers.
Opinion
Hey there, time traveller!
This article was published 31/03/2022 (776 days ago), so information in it may no longer be current.
Emergency room wait times at Manitoba’s largest hospital have hit double digits for the first time since health authorities began publishing the monthly statistics.
At Health Sciences Centre, the longest wait times for nine out of 10 patients seeking medical care hit 10 hours for the month of February — the highest since 2017, when the Winnipeg Regional Health Authority started posting such ER data.
That’s up from 6.62 hours in January.
At St. Boniface Hospital, the February time was 7.63 hours, up from 7.55 in January.
The Health Sciences Centre in Winnipeg.
(Wayne Glowacki / Winnipeg Free Press files)
It’s further evidence that as hospital staff — hundreds of whom were redeployed during the pandemic to treat COVID-19 patients — return to their regular jobs in areas such as surgery, medical wards are struggling more than ever to keep up with the influx of admitted patients.
The bulk of ER overcrowding occurs when demand for medical beds outstrips supply.
When hospitals can’t accommodate the number of newly admitted patients, the system backs up in ERs.
Admitted patients — those sick or injured enough to require a hospital bed — often wait days in gurneys for space to open up on medical wards.
The more admitted patients there are piled up in emergency wards, the longer it takes for busy ER doctors and nurses to see new patients.
It’s an age-old problem but it’s one that has worsened after the province consolidated acute care hospitals in Winnipeg between 2017 and 2019, including closing three ERs.
The longest wait time at all Winnipeg ERs and urgent care centres in February for nine out of 10 patients (called the 90th percentile wait time) was 6.87 hours — up from 6.62 hours in January.
Wait times are far longer than they were prior to consolidation.
In October 2017, when the first phase of the hospital reform plan was implemented, that number was 3.9 hours.
The wait times measure how long it takes for a patient to see a doctor or nurse practitioner after registering at the triage desk.
The median wait time for all ERs and urgent care centres in Winnipeg was 2.18 hours in February.
In October 2017, it was 1.35.
It’s not surprising a recent Probe Research poll found two-thirds of Manitobans believe hospitals are in worse shape since the Progressive Conservative government consolidated acute care services from six hospitals to three.
The promise of faster care and “the right care at the right time” promised under the consolidation plan has not worked.
Patient flow through hospitals has not improved.
The most important gauge of that is the health of emergency departments, which become overflow stations for admitted patients when medical wards are full.
That’s what hallway medicine is — and it’s getting worse.
The median wait time for all ERs and urgent care centres in Winnipeg was 2.18 hours in February.
(Mike Deal / Winnipeg Free Press files)
It’s probably why the WRHA and the province no longer provide the public with regular updates on the progress of consolidation, as they did during the early years of implementation.
The news isn’t good.
Emergency department overcrowding is not caused by low-acuity patients showing up at ERs when they could be treated elsewhere (like walk-in clinics).
That’s a myth.
Study after study across Canada have shown long ER wait times are caused primarily by a lack of availability of hospital beds on medical wards.
When hospitals are overcrowded, ERs are overcrowded.
Most hospitals in Winnipeg operate with little to no surge capacity and can’t handle large influxes of new patients, even when surgical and other beds are used temporarily to accommodate medical patients.
Winnipeg Free Press | Newsletter Business Weekly Monday mornings The latest local business news and a lookahead to the coming week.
Sign Up I agree to the Terms and Conditions, Cookie and Privacy Policies, and CASL agreement.
It’s an inflexible, under-staffed and poorly resourced system.
The bad news is the situation could get worse if COVID-19 hospitalizations increase again, as they have in recent weeks in other provinces.
Health officials in Manitoba have said they expect a rise in infections and hospitalizations after all public health measures, including mask use, were lifted March 15.
Now that Health Minister Audrey Gordon has approved a near-complete blackout of pandemic information, including the number of COVID-19 patients in hospital, the only way the public may be able to gauge whether conditions worsen again is through ER wait times.
It’s one of the few metrics left still made public.
tom.brodbeck@freepress.mb.ca
Symptoms of depression exist on a spectrum and can range from a change in appetite to having thoughts of self-harm or contemplating suicide.
Other depressive symptoms can include trouble sleeping, a loss of interest or pleasure in activities once enjoyed, and feeling hopeless.
"People with seasonal affective disorder unfortunately often don't get diagnosed unless their symptoms of depression get very severe," says Jason Hunziker, MD, chief of the Division of Adult Psychiatry at University of Utah Health.
Don't wait until it is the middle of winter and you are experiencing the symptoms of SAD to start preparing.
Know your symptoms and plan.
“If you know that you tend to experience seasonal depression, start preparing six to eight weeks prior to the time your symptoms usually start,” Hunziker says.
“Get back on medications if you found that helpful in the past and plan to re-engage with your therapist and set out a plan.
If you can, plan a vacation for the middle of winter in a location with abundant sunlight.
Do your best to maintain a good sleep schedule, eat healthy, exercise, and stay connected to family and friends.”
Four new long-COVID studies reveal that 10% of French patients infected early in the pandemic still had symptoms 1 year later, SARS-CoV-2 can profoundly damage the brain for months, and very stressful events exacerbate persistent symptoms.
For some, a long road to recovery
French researchers published a new study in JAMA Network Open on 1-year rates of long COVID among 53,047 adults in three population-based groups who took a nationwide survey from Apr 1 to Jun 30, 2020.
The researchers obtained blood samples for serologic confirmation of infection from May 1 to Nov 30, 2020, and fielded an online follow-up questionnaire from Jun 1 to Sep 30, 2021.
Average participant age was 50.9 years, and 63.7% were women.
In total, 3,972 people had tested positive for SARS-CoV-2, with 2,647 (66.6%) of them reporting at least one symptom during their infections.
Of the 2,647 participants, 32.5% said they had at least one COVID-19 symptom for 2 months or longer.
The estimated proportion of participants who had at least one lingering symptom was 18.4% at 6 months, 10.1% at 12 months, and 7.8% after 18 months.
Among participants who had symptomatic infections, an estimated 33.6% had more than five symptoms 1 week after infection, falling to 2.8% at 2 months.
An estimated 97.5% of participants with weakness, 94.2% of those with impaired attention or concentration, and 77.5% of those with memory loss reported symptom resolution at 1 year.
The most common long-COVID symptoms were shortness of breath (26.5%), joint pain (26.9%), loss of smell or taste (27.0%), weakness (20.6%), impaired attention or concentration (22.3%), memory loss (40.0%), and sleep disorders (36.6%).
Risk factors for lingering symptoms were age older than 60 years (hazard ratio [HR], 0.78), female sex (HR, 0.64), a history of cancer (HR, 0.61) or tobacco use (HR, 0.80), obesity (HR, 0.75), and more than four symptoms during infection (HR, 0.43).
In general, women were slower to recover their sense of taste or smell.
Older people, women, and those with a history of anxiety or depression, cancer, diabetes, tobacco use, obesity, or a higher number of acute symptoms were slower to recover from weakness.
Slow resolution of impaired attention or concentration was tied only to older age.
"Given the high level of cumulative incidence of COVID-19, the absolute prevalent number of people with persistent symptoms is a public health concern," the authors wrote.
"These findings suggest the need to optimally manage comorbid conditions in individuals with long COVID to help reduce the duration of their symptoms.
"
Cognitive deficits after even mild COVID
Two studies presented this week at the Society for Neuroscience annual meeting in San Diego describe profound brain damage that lingers for months after COVID-19 infection.
In one study, Mexican researchers used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to assess the sensorimotor brain regions of 240 children 10 to 13 years old infected with SARS-CoV-2 in the previous 4 to 15 months.
Relative to controls, COVID-19 patients still required more resources in three areas of the brain.
In the other study, Brazilian scientists using MRI and positron emission tomography (PET) imaging found that about a quarter of adults who had mild COVID-19 had impaired ability to coordinate their fine-motor skills and spatial abilities 4 months after infection.
The findings were associated with molecular and clinical changes in the brain.
"This is preliminary evidence that cognitive deficit from neuroinflammation may result from even mild COVID-19 symptoms," the researchers said in a Society for Neuroscience news release.
The researchers said that while SARS-CoV-2 doesn't directly enter the brain, it can still cause long-term brain-function changes through inflammation.
Robyn Klein, MD, PhD, of Washington University and a panel moderator, said it isn't the first time that a flulike viral disease has been tied to an increased risk of dementia.
"But one of the most important aspects of this work is the magnitude of people potentially affected by this—millions upon millions," she said.
"We need to move on to alternative hypotheses for these neurologic diseases; we also need to inform the public and physicians that this is a real illness and that they should be proactive in addressing it," she added.
Major life stressors tied to higher risk
In a study published last week in the Journal of Neurological Sciences, the NYU Neurology COVID-19 Study Team assessed hospitalized COVID-19 patients 6 and 12 months after diagnosis using the modified Rankin Scale (mRS), the Barthel Index, the telephone Montreal Cognitive Assessment (t-MoCA), and Neuro-QoL (quality-of-life) tests for anxiety, depression, fatigue, sleep, and long-COVID symptoms from Mar 10 to May 20, 2020.
Of 790 COVID-19 survivors, 57% completed a 6- or 12-month assessment, and 77 of 451 (17%) died between hospital release and 12-month follow-up.
At 12 months, 121 (51%) of 239 participants reported significant life stressors.
Financial or food insecurity, death of a close contact, and new disability were the strongest predictors of worse mRS, Barthel Index, depression, fatigue, and sleep scores and persistent symptoms (adjusted odds ratios, 2.5 to 20.8).
Other predictors of poor outcome were older age (tied to worse mRS, Barthel, t-MoCA, and depression scores), baseline disability (linked to worse mRS, fatigue, and Barthel scores), female sex (associated with worse Barthel and anxiety scores), and severe COVID-19 (linked to worse Barthel index scores and lingering symptoms).
The researchers said that pandemic-related stress may have unmasked previously undiagnosed mood disorders.
"Therapies that lessen the trauma of the most stress-inducing life events need to be a central part of treatment for long COVID, with more research needed to validate the best approaches," lead author Jennifer Frontera, MD, said in an NYU Langone Health news release.
Arthritis is a disease that affects body joints.
There are more than 100 types of arthritis, with more than 350 million people affected around the globe, including about four million Australians.
Arthritis causes pain and disability and commonly reduces quality of life.
In Australia in 2015, about 54,000 people aged 45–64 couldn’t work due to severe arthritis.
Their median income was only a quarter of the income of full-time workers who did not have arthritis.
So it is not surprising some people want to try different diets, supplements or therapies to see if they alleviate symptoms or help them gain a sense of control over their condition.
However, a major review found specific supplements or food components were unlikely to lead to significant improvements in arthritis outcomes such as stiffness, pain and function.
The main nutrition recommendation was to adopt healthy eating patterns.
Remind me, what causes arthritis?
And what are the symptoms?
Risk factors for developing arthritis include ones you can’t control – such as genetics, sex, and age – and some you may be able to, such as smoking, repetitive injuries, body weight, occupation and some infections.
Types of arthritis include osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, juvenile arthritis, gout, systemic lupus erythematosus (lupus) and scleroderma.
Read more: Arthritis isn't just a condition affecting older people, it likely starts much earlier
Common symptoms include:
pain
stiffness or reduced joint movement
swelling, redness and warmth in the joints.
Less specific symptoms include tiredness, weight loss or feeling unwell.
So what does the evidence say about supplements?
The European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology, the expert European group on arthritis, recently published a detailed critique on diet and supplement use in arthritis.
It synthesised findings from 24 systematic reviews of existing research as well as an additional 150 extra studies, covering more than 80 different dietary components and supplements.
The alliance identified there were limited studies on each individual product with the majority of studies being of low quality.
This means that for most supplements they couldn’t make recommendations about whether or not to use them.
However, for osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis, although most studies were of low or moderate quality, a few supplements had positive effects.
Vitamin D, chondroitin and glucosamine
For osteoarthritis, there was moderate-quality evidence supporting a small positive effect on pain and function for taking vitamin D, chondroitin and glucosamine (both compounds found in cartilage) supplements.
Here, moderate quality means although the studies had some limitations and their results should be interpreted with caution, they can be used to guide recommendations.
This suggests people could choose to try these common supplements for a few months and see whether they get any benefit, but stop taking them if there is no improvement in their symptoms.
Fish oil
For rheumatoid arthritis, there was moderate quality evidence for a small positive effect on pain for omega-3 (fish) oils.
Again, people could try these supplements for a few months and see whether they get any benefit, but stop taking them if there is no improvement.
Other supplements
For all other arthritis categories, and other specific dietary components or supplements, the evidence was rated as low to very low (see tables 1–5 in this link).
This means any improvements in arthritis outcomes could be due to chance or bias, with positive results more likely to be published, or potential bias occurring when a trial was sponsored by a supplement manufacturer.
Read more: I'm taking glucosamine for my arthritis.
So what's behind the new advice to stop?
What does it all mean?
Current research indicates it’s unlikely specific foods, supplements or dietary components affect arthritis outcomes to a large degree.
However, given the higher risk for heart disease associated with arthritis, the recommendation is to have a healthy diet and lifestyle in order to improve your overall health and wellbeing.
So how do you improve your health and wellbeing?
Here are four key things to consider:
1.
Eat a healthy, varied diet
Eating food – rather than taking supplements – means you get the other nutrients that foods contain, including healthy sources of fat, protein, dietary fibre and a range of vitamin and minerals essential to maintain a healthy body.
This is why the recommendation for people with arthritis is to eat a healthy diet, because vegetables, fruit, legumes and wholegrains contain a range of phytonutrients needed to help dampen down oxidative stress triggered by inflammatory processes associated with arthritis.
Read more: What is a balanced diet anyway?
A healthy diet includes foods rich in omega-3 fats such as fatty fish (salmon, tuna, sardines), chia seeds, flaxseed oil, walnuts, canola oil, and vitamin D (eggs, fish, and milk or margarine fortified with vitamin D).
And don’t forget sun exposure, which allows the body to produce vitamin D.
2.
Avoid alcohol
Alcohol intake should be discussed with your doctor as it can interact with other treatments.
Small amounts of alcohol are unlikely to have negative impacts on arthritis, unless you have other health issues like liver disease or you take certain medications such as methotrexate or leflunomide.
For rheumatoid arthritis, moderate alcohol consumption could increase the risk of arthritis flare ups.
Alcohol can also increase the risk of gout flare ups.
Read more: Got gout?
Here's what to eat and avoid
3.
Aim for a healthy weight
Aiming for a healthy weight can help arthritis by reducing the load on affected joints such as hips and knees, and by boosting your intake of healthy foods rich in phytonutrients.
Ask your doctor for support to achieve well managed, intentional weight loss if you’re carrying excess weight.
You may need referral to an accredited practising dietitian for personalised medical nutrition therapy or to a physiotherapist or exercise physiologist for specific help to improve mobility and physical activity.
Read more: Health Check: what's the best diet for weight loss?
4. Be cautious with supplements
If you decide to try specific complimentary therapies or dietary supplements, discuss potential side-effects or interactions with your regular medicines with your doctor and pharmacist.
Try the products for a few months (or as long as one container lasts) so you can monitor any side-effects versus your sense of wellbeing, reduction in use of pain medications and the cost.
If you’re not getting any benefit then spend that money on more healthy foods instead.
Find out how healthy your diet is by taking our free Healthy Eating Quiz.
Wolves hit back as Liverpool and Man Utd move to kill off bid to scrap VAR
This article takes a closer look at the types of empathy and their relationship to bipolar disorder.
Mood disturbance is a hallmark symptom of bipolar disorder.
Still, it is also a condition that can create cognitive change, including change in the area of empathy — the ability to be attuned to another person’s feelings and emotions.
Bipolar disorder is a mental health condition featuring extreme mood and energy shifts.
It includes episodes of mania, a state of heightened energy and agitation, and periods of low mood that meet the criteria for major depressive episodes.
Neurological changes in bipolar disorder may contribute to a lower capacity for empathy, but sometimes empathy is there — just hidden behind self-focused symptoms.
Bipolar disorder appears to be related to low empathy in a two-fold way: neurologically and through symptomology.
Neurologically
The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown, but it is a condition that can feature changes both in brain structure and chemistry.
Cognitive symptoms are common , but some of these changes may also be linked to a lower capacity to experience empathy.
According to a 2017 study , individuals living with bipolar disorder show lower neurological activity in brain areas associated with empathy toward the pain of others.
Similarly, a 2021 paper reported weaker neural connectivity in areas related to cognitive empathy among those living with bipolar disorder.
Even outside of mood episodes, empathy may be low.
A small 2022 cross-sectional study notes that during periods of mood stability, people with bipolar disorder can exhibit low empathy.
However, empathy is a multidimensional concept.
It can be broken down into types, most commonly cognitive and emotional empathy.
Cognitive empathy is the ability to recognize and understand someone else’s mental state.
Emotional empathy, also known as affective empathy, takes that one step further and allows one to feel what others feel as if it is happening personally.
While research shows the ability to experience cognitive empathy may be lower in those living with bipolar disorder, there may be times when emotional empathy increases.
A small 2017 study found that during mania, emotional empathy levels were higher than during depressive episodes in bipolar disorder.
Symptomology
A lower level of empathy does not mean the absence of empathy.
Ryan Sheridan, a board certified psychiatric mental health nurse practitioner from Washington, D.C., explains mood symptoms can sometimes override someone’s ability to focus on others.
“People with manic or hypomanic episodes may have decreased empathy as they become overly self-absorbed and focused on their own thoughts and feelings,” he says.
“On the other hand, during depressive episodes, individuals with bipolar disorder may struggle with feelings of hopelessness and worthlessness, making it difficult for them to respond to the needs of others with empathy.”
It is important to note that the effects of bipolar disorder on empathy can vary greatly among individuals.
Overall, existing research on empathy in bipolar disorder is limited and sometimes conflicting.
A 2021 study, for example, found individuals living with bipolar disorder showed no deficits in cognitive or emotional empathy.
The conflicting findings can be a result of studying empathy from different perspectives.
Having empathetic feelings and acting in empathic ways are two different things.
While empathy is the ability to recognize how people feel — which may be intact during a manic episode — the ability to use the brain’s executive function to allow this recognition to influence one’s behavior can be lower during a manic episode.
That may explain why a person can appear self-absorbed in this state.
The best way to determine if you have COVID-19 or the flu is by getting tested.
COVID-19 testing is now widely available in the U.S.
There are two types of tests—PCR and antigen.
If you’re not sure what test to use, the CDC can help you determine which one to take.
A negative COVID-19 test means the test did not detect the virus, but this doesn’t rule out that you could have an infection.
If you have been exposed and test negative with an antigen test, test again 48 hours after the first negative test if you have symptoms.
Test a total of three times each 48 hours apart if you have been exposed, test negative, and do not have symptoms.
You’re late to everything.
If you don’t put an event in your calendar, you completely forget about it.
And those tasks at work you’ve been putting off?
They’re piling up fast, but you do your best work the night before a project is due so everything is fine.
Advertisement Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center.
Advertising on our site helps support our mission.
We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
These may seem like personality traits you’ve acquired over the years.
After all, you are who you are!
Never change.
But, if these traits are causing disruption to your relationships and leading to other problems that include disorganization, anxiety or burnout, they may actually be symptoms of adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
ADHD symptoms in adults are more subtle and harder to catch than symptoms of ADHD in kids.
Pediatric behavioral health specialist Michael Manos, PhD, explains how to spot and manage symptoms of adult ADHD and when to know how these symptoms are in fact a problem you should address.
Adult ADHD symptoms
Look at your life and look at your choices: if you’ve left a wave of what Dr. Manos calls “incompletions” in your path — failed projects, incomplete homework, missed dates and forgotten anniversaries — you may very well be dealing with ADHD.
“Adults with ADHD tend to leave things partially done and incomplete,” says Dr. Manos.
“Those incompletions are the central functional characteristic that is problematic for an adult with ADHD.”
Diagnosing ADHD is a 3-step process.
When diagnosing an adult for ADHD, a doctor looks for:
Symptoms of ADHD that are problematic to a person’s life.
External factors that could be causing the behavior in question.
The presence of another mental health disorder.
“You do not have a disorder unless you have dysfunction,” says Dr. Manos.
“Sometimes, if people have had dire circumstances in their life — like if they can’t pay rent, they’re unable to send a child to the school they want to go to, or if someone in the family has died or experienced some sort of trauma — when people have concerns like that, those concerns can be preoccupying their attention, make them forgetful, make them irritable or experience other symptoms of ADHD.”
An estimated 2.5% of adults worldwide have ADHD and 4.4% of adults in the U.S. have ADHD.
More than half of those who have ADHD also have other behavioral health and mood disorder diagnoses like depression or anxiety.
And according to one 2019 study, adult ADHD diagnoses are growing four times faster than childhood diagnoses.
“When adult ADHD is not attended to, with either therapy or medicine, it results in the adult leaving a trail of incompletions in their path, and leaving things incomplete can cause some people to get anxious or depressed,“ says Dr. Manos.
“Many times, adults with ADHD can be diagnosed with a depressive disorder or anxiety disorder because of that very thing.”
Advertisement
For this reason, it’s important to get the diagnosis for adult ADHD correct and identify any underlying causes to provide the best course of treatment.
When diagnosing ADHD, doctors look at 18 different symptoms — nine inattentive symptoms and nine hyperactivity symptoms.
For a child to be diagnosed with ADHD, they need to present six of the following symptoms in at least two different settings or environments (like at home and at school).
For adults, they only need to present five or more of the following in any environment.
Inattentive symptoms of adult ADHD
There are two kinds of attention at play here:
Automatic attention occurs when we pay attention to things we love, know and desire.
On a sunny day, for example, you may feel the need to be outside because it’s an easy and natural activity to do.
occurs when we pay attention to things we love, know and desire.
On a sunny day, for example, you may feel the need to be outside because it’s an easy and natural activity to do.
Directed attention or effortful attention requires you to be intentional with your focus.
So maybe it is sunny outside, but you have homework or an assignment to finish, so you instead direct your attention to the thing you don’t want to do.
This effort to finish your task requires your executive control in order to get it done.
We all use these two forms of attention to various degrees, but when our ability to direct, hold and maintain our attention is hindered or interrupted, it can cause the nine symptoms listed below.
“People with ADHD have impaired directed attention,” says Dr. Manos.
“They’re not able to easily use effortful attention.
Instead, they avoid it and they engage in automatic attention tasks instead.”
1.
Lack of attention to details
This may seem like a no-brainer, but if you ever feel just a little left-of-center on recalling specific details to get things accomplished, this is a sign of ADHD.
Maybe your spouse told you they left the spare key for the back door in the top right drawer of your nightstand, but you look in the top left drawer instead.
Or maybe you’re putting together a presentation but left out some key points because you were moving too quickly.
At the end of the day, you could use some help focusing a bit more on what’s happening around you.
2.
Difficulty staying on task
It’s easy for you to bounce around from one task to the next, maybe for no other reason than you have a lot going on.
I mean, you’ve always claimed you’re really good at multitasking.
But if you have six projects, assignments or activities that are all 40% complete, and you’re feeling the pressure to just get one thing — anything — finished, this might be a problem for you.
3.
Trouble listening
When someone is speaking to you directly, you have a glazed-over look in your eyes.
It’s not that you’re intentionally ignoring them, but maybe a thought popped into your head that reminded you of a funny story, and suddenly your mind is somewhere else waiting for an opportunity to share your thoughts.
If you’ve ever been told you don’t listen to specifics or that you seem inattentive during conversations, this could be your ADHD rearing its head.
4.
Lack of follow-through
Deadlines, birthdays, anniversaries — the important details about these events not only slip your mind, but you have trouble following through on promises you’ve made and on completing actual tasks.
And when other people call you out, it may be hard to explain just how things went south on your decision-making abilities.
After all, you really did have the best intentions.
“You may very well intend to do it and you just don’t,” says Dr. Manos.
“You avoid it instead.”
Advertisement
5.
Disorganization
You can be disorganized in a variety of ways.
Maybe you don’t put your dishes in the right cabinet, or you throw your bright green sweatshirts into the laundry basket that’s meant for only your white clothes.
Someone could take a look at your space and think it’s cluttered, or you have a hard time finding the things you need at any given point.
Either way you look at it, your system of organization gets in the way when it becomes a barrier to finishing tasks on time and making you feel successful.
6. Procrastination
Ahh, those late nights writing a paper the day before it’s due bring back fond memories, don’t they?
While your days of putting everything off until the last minute in high school are long over, procrastination can perk up in all sorts of other ways in your adult life.
They may not even be noticeable to you at first.
You put off responding to text messages, calling people back or making a Facebook calendar event for that upcoming Friendsgiving you’re hosting.
Maybe you hit the snooze on your alarm clock one too many times, and instead of getting out of bed and getting ready for work, you put those activities off in exchange for a few more minutes of sleep.
“Procrastination is the avoidance of having to use effortful attention,” says Dr. Manos.
“It’s easier for adults with ADHD to put off things they don’t want to do in exchange for the things that require less effort.”
7. Loses things often
You can never find your car keys and leave behind your phone whenever exiting a room only to forget you ever left it there in the first place.
As scattered as you are, it’s easy for you to set something down, even an assignment or project, and then forget where you left it.
8.
Easily distracted
Like a dog running after a shiny new toy, you are easily drawn from one thing to another.
You can be in the middle of a conversation and then something will happen outside of the window that catches all of your attention.
Or, maybe you look at your phone in the middle of a meeting and suddenly 30 minutes have passed by and you haven’t been paying any attention at all.
This can cause serious anxiety if you’re so distracted it becomes obvious to others you aren’t 100% present.
9.
Forgetfulness
Dates, cooking timers, important reminders — you name it, your mind throws it to the wind.
If you ever catch yourself telling the same story two or three times without any recollection of telling it before, that’s not so terrible.
But if you forget important details that have been told to you by a close friend, family member, boss or significant other, you might come off as ignorant or unable to be attentive to their needs.
“Everybody is inattentive at some point or another in their life.
Everybody tends to lose or misplace something,” says Dr. Manos.
“It’s not that adults with ADHD do these things that make them have ADHD.
It’s that adults with ADHD do these things so much that it poses a problem for them.”
Hyperactivity symptoms of adult ADHD
Hyperactivity in children is easier to catch than hyperactivity in adults.
When a hyperactive child is in a controlled environment like a classroom, they may be openly disruptive, restless and anxious.
But adults who have ADHD might just always appear hurried or overwhelmed by too many tasks because over time they’ve taken on too many things on at once.
“The manifestation of these hyperactive behaviors are certainly different in adults,” says Dr. Manos.
Here’s how:
1.
Fidgeting
If you have a hard time focusing in a meeting because you’re doodling, note-taking, or fumbling with your phone, this can be considered fidgeting.
Biting your nails or tapping your feet can also be a sign of fidgeting.
Advertisement
2.
Getting out of your seat often
Coupled with your ability to be easily distracted, maybe you have a hard time sitting at your desk all day so you schedule several breaks to walk away from your work area and then find yourself caught up in other tasks and conversations.
This isn’t inherently an issue, unless these periods of getting up and walking around are disrupting your ability to complete tasks.
3. Chronic restlessness
Fidgeting, getting up and walking around: these are all signs of chronic restlessness.
And it’s not just that you feel restless during the hours you should be productive; you also feel restless when you should be at rest.
Do you ever just get out of bed or put off bedtime because you feel like you should be doing something, and in reality it could all wait until the morning?
If your restlessness is interrupting your ability to sleep, work or be productive, you may struggle with ADHD.
4.
Difficulty engaging in quiet activities
If you can’t sit still, you may have trouble participating in solo experiences like reading a book, meditating or watching a full feature-length film without getting distracted or disrupting the activity.
You may also have difficulty falling asleep unless there’s some music or film playing in the background to occupy your racing thoughts.
“Sometimes people can’t even sit and watch a movie even if the movie is engaging,” says Dr. Manos.
5.
You’re always on-the-go
You’re the high-energy, go-get-’em type.
You’re a master multitasker and you never seem to slow down for anything or anyone.
Every minute of your day is filled with some sort of activity, and when you’re working to complete one thing, you actually distract yourself with other things along the way.
“If you are one of those people who are constantly on the go, constantly getting stuff done, and you’re hyperfocusing in different areas, it might not be a problem.
People who are hyperactive get a lot done,” says Dr. Manos.
“But often, adults with ADHD tend to take on more than they actually can complete.
Instead of completing everything, they tend to avoid the additional tasks that they might have accrued for themselves and they leave things incomplete along the way.”
6.
Talking excessively
You ever hear that phrase, ‘It’s mind over matter’?
That’s especially true when you have a thought you just can’t hold back.
Your impulsivity tends to take over when telling a story, or sometimes you feel the need to over-share details about what you’re thinking simply because you just have to get it out of your system.
7. Blurting out or finishing sentences
You’re quick to get to the point and are almost impulsive when having a conversation.
You may not necessarily intend to override someone else while they speak, but your mind is moving faster than your mouth.
When that happens, you tend to pick up the pace and keep things moving more toward your speed, however unintentionally.
8.
Difficulty waiting in lines
Whether it’s the checkout line at the grocery store or it’s backed-up traffic on the highway: you’re impatient in long lines, quickly irritable and everyone needs to move out of your way.
This is in large part fueled by chronic restlessness that builds up when things around you start to slow down.
9.
Interrupting or intruding on others
When you’re hyperactive, your mind and body may be moving so fast that other people’s boundaries may not be front-of-mind right away.
Maybe you barge into rooms without knocking, you interject in conversations when your opinion isn’t needed or maybe you feel the need to always get the last word in when having an argument.
These impulsive actions may easily seem like part of your personality, but they could also be signs of ADHD if they’re causing issues with your relationships.
What can trigger ADHD in adults?
Similar to other mood disorders, there are common triggers that can set off symptoms that coincide with ADHD impulses, like:
Stress.
Lack of sleep.
Malnutrition and poor diet.
Overstimulation.
Changes in environmental factors like sound sensitivity, temperature and smells.
Lack of genuine interest.
Advertisement
When to seek help
Like other mood disorders, if your inattentiveness or hyperactivity is disrupting your way of life and causing harm to your relationships, your healthcare provider can work with you on a variety of treatments.
Most often, cognitive behavioral therapy paired with prescription medication can be the best course of action to helping you manage your systems and improve your focus.
Your doctor may also advise an ADHD coach who can work with you to set up structures and coping mechanisms to help manage your symptoms.
“The point is that an adult with ADHD must often have an external organizational system like calendars, reminders, timers and a network of people to help keep them on track,” says Dr. Manos.
“If they don’t, then they’re relying on what they keep in their heads to assist them and that information is at times highly inaccessible.”
Being forthright about your diagnosis can also be helpful in some relationships — after all, it’s sometimes easier to understand and relate to someone who says they’ll be late to an event because they establish a clear and honest expectation than to create an upset due to an unfulfilled expectation from the start.
“Whenever possible, you want to try and clean up your incompletions by doing the tasks you set out to finish, changing the angle of the task if you can’t complete them or canceling the task completely,” says Dr. Manos.
“It really comes down to setting up proper and predictable expectations for yourself and other people.”
To hear more about ADHD from Dr. Manos, listen to the Health Essentials Podcast episode, “ADHD and Kids.”
New episodes of the Health Essentials Podcast publish every Wednesday.
A new study by researchers at the University of Oxford, Queen Mary University of London, Institute for Advanced Studies, Vienna, and the Medical University of Graz, has found that lateral flow tests detect Covid-19 with similar accuracy to laboratory-based PCR tests, providing they are used at the onset of infection and soon after symptoms start.
Lateral flow tests are cheaper and produce a result in just 30 minutes - much faster than the time it takes to receive a PCR test result, which can take 1-3 days.
The finding could be pivotal to national strategies looking to tackle the next phase of the pandemic, especially as timely and rapid testing becomes even more important once the current restrictions lift in England.
As part of the study, over 2,500 people with mild to moderate flu-like symptoms were assessed by GPs in the district of Liezen (population 79,652), Austria, between October 22 and November 30, 2020 and tested for viral antigen using lateral flow tests.
Those who were suspected to have Covid-19 were also tested using a PCR test.
The lateral flow tests detected more than 95 per cent of the cases found by PCR, and correctly identified 89 per cent of cases as negative.
The study is the first to compare lateral flow and PCR testing on the same group of people on a large scale.
It also included the variables of a real-world setting: five different brands of test kit, three laboratories, and professional swabbing offered at 20 GP practices.
Study author Dr Werner Leber from Queen Mary University of London said:
'Previous studies have suggested lateral flow tests may be less sensitive than PCR in detecting Covid-19, particularly among asymptomatic individuals and during the early or late stage of an infection when the viral load is lowest.
But we have found that in patients who are newly symptomatic, the two testing methods have similar levels of accuracy.
'Countries are considering using lateral flow tests to manage future waves of the pandemic.
Our findings support this move, but ensuring tests are properly administered should be integral to any strategy.'
Dr Jasmina Panovska-Griffiths from the Big Data Institute and The Queen’s College at University of Oxford added:
'In our study, both shorter duration of symptoms and higher viral load were significantly associated with a positive lateral flow tests.
This highlights the necessity of testing at early infection with lateral flow tests, and shows that in patients who are newly symptomatic, the two testing methods have similar levels of accuracy.
'Our study is the first study to demonstrate that point-of-care antigen testing using lateral flow tests combined with clinical assessment of symptomatic patients can rapidly and accurately detect SARS-CoV-2 infection in primary care.
'
Dr Thomas Czypionka from the Institute for Advanced Studies, Vienna, said:
'The study results provide the basis for future containment strategies in primary care, which can make an important contribution in control and prevention of a pandemic.
In the context of future relaxations of lockdown rules - in addition to vaccinations - the early detection of people with infection through reliable tests will be necessary in order to control COVID-19.'
Dr Oliver Lammel, clinical lead of the study, said:
'The study supports efforts to conduct population-wide LFT tests.
It is important, however, that the tests are carried out correctly by qualified personnel, as was the case in our study.'
In summary, this study provides evidence that lateral flow tests can accurately detect SARS-CoV-2 infection as an alternative to PCR testing among symptomatic patients in a real-life primary care setting across a large geographical area.
The study was funded by the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program (grant agreement No 101016233 (PERISCOPE).
Keith Roach
To Your Health
Dear Dr. Roach: Can you elaborate on “long COVID”?
Specifically, do people experiencing long COVID carry the virus for an extended period?
Are they contagious during long COVID, or does the term refer to lingering symptoms but not necessarily testing positive?
— S.E.
Dear S.E.:
People with normal immune systems are almost never contagious after about 10 days following the onset of symptoms of COVID-19.
The greatest period of contagion is during the two days before onset of symptoms through the day after they start, which is why masking is so important.
People can be highly contagious without even knowing they have the disease.
People with severe immune deficiency may be contagious for a longer period of time, so testing to make sure they are negative and consultation with an expert is advisable.
“Long COVID” refers to persistent symptoms after the virus is gone, long past the infectious period.
There is no evidence that people with long COVID are infectious for longer times than people who have mild or no symptoms.
There are many viruses that may continue to cause symptoms long after the acute period.
Some viruses may cause damage to various tissues and organs – polio is a classic example.
More than 99% of people have just a mild cold symptom with polio and get completely better, but a sliver of people will have damage to the nerves and develop muscle paralysis, sometimes fatally.
It took many years to work out the mechanism of how polio causes these long-term symptoms; likewise, how COVID causes the long-term symptoms it causes is not yet well understood.
The incidence of long COVID varies by study, but the lowest number published I have seen is 10% of people continuing to have symptoms for three months after infection.
Many organ systems can be affected long-term by COVID-19, but fatigue, “brain fog,” sleep disturbances, chest discomfort and shortness of breath are some of the most common symptoms people with long COVID will notice.
I am continually surprised by people who won’t take the vaccine out of fear of it causing possible long-term side effects.
This just hasn’t been seen, despite 5 billion doses administered worldwide, and despite there being 300 years of experience with vaccines.
No vaccine (other than live vaccines) has ever had long-term complications that haven’t shown up right away.
Those who remain unvaccinated don’t seem to realize that they risk not only severe disease and death from COVID-19, but also the possibility of long-term debilitating symptoms.
Dear Dr. Roach: Would a copper-infused mask be effective against the flu or COVID-19?
— J.A.
Dear J.A.:
All masks reduce transmission of COVID-19.
Masks have variable effectiveness for the wearer, but may be more important to stop transmission from the wearer, if they are infected and don’t know it.
The best mask remains the N95 mask, but surgical masks and fabric masks made from two layers of cotton and one layer of synthetic material provided outstanding protection.
Copper has antiviral properties, but it is not clear whether adding copper to a mask makes it more effective.
I think the type of material used and how well it fits are more important than whether there is copper inside it.
Readers may email questions to ToYourGoodHealth@med.cornell.edu.
Experts are warning everyone to be vigilant when it comes to one type of cancer and are encouraging people to be aware of nine key symptoms they should always get checked out
Summer might be almost over but the risk from skin cancer is always present and experts have issued warnings about the dangers of the disease and advised how to protect yourself from harmful UV rays.
Some 16,000 people are diagnosed with Melanoma - the most serious form of skin cancer - every year.
It also kills some 2,340 people a year, according to Cancer Research UK.
Melanoma develops when skin gets too much sun and the cells become damaged and start mutating.
Because people often don't look for the warning signs, it often spreads before it's noticed and treated.
In particular, the disease often develops on people's feet because they very rarely check them.
The NHS warns that any open sore or cut that fails to heal or quickly returns should be checked out.
If it is caught early, Melanoma is very treatable and most people make a full recovery.
The most common warning sign of the disease is the appearance of a new mole or a change in an existing mole.
According to the NHS, things that increase your chances of getting melanoma include your age and having pale skin, a large number of moles and a family history of skin cancer.
With that in mind, check out the eight other warning signs when it comes to skin cancer:
Mole with a mix of colours Large mole Mole that changes over time Swollen mole Bleeding mole Itchy mole Crusty mole Mole in the shape of a line under a nail
For women, the most common location for melanoma in the UK is the legs.
Men are more likely to get the disease in their trunk, back or torso.
Here are some co-occurring conditions you should know about.
If you think you have depression , getting screened is important to find the right help.
Left untreated, depression can get worse and make other health concerns worse too.
Depression has a complicated relationship with other medical conditions, especially chronic ones.
In some cases, depression can be a risk factor or an early symptom of another medical condition; in other cases, medical conditions are risk factors or symptoms of depression.
01 of 10 Cancer Feeling sad, angry, or anxious can be expected when you have cancer.
Still, clinical depression is also common among cancer patients, according to the National Cancer Institute, especially with certain types of the disease.
"People with gastrointestinal cancers, typically stomach or pancreatic, have an increased likelihood of developing depression, and often it can precede the diagnosis," said Paul B. Hicks, MD, PhD, associate dean at Texas A&M University College of Medicine in Bryan.
Experts aren't sure exactly why this is, but different theories point to immune-system changes and genetics.
Per the National Cancer Institute, risk factors such as having cancer pain that is not well controlled, feeling physically weakened, having a poor prognosis, or taking certain medications, may also cause depression.
02 of 10 Chronic Pain One 2016 study published in the journal Pain found that approximately 60% of patients with chronic pain also presented with depression.
Like cancer, the link can go both ways: Pain can lead to the release of inflammatory markers that may be connected with mood changes, and ongoing pain may lead to depression.
Depression can also precede pain.
For instance, people with fibromyalgia are three times as likely to have had depression than the average person, said Miggie Greenberg, MD, associate professor of psychiatry at Saint Louis University School of Medicine.
Pain, regardless of the cause, can also be a symptom of depression.
"Many people don't have a lot of vocabulary for psychological feelings and so express emotional distress with physical symptoms," said Dr. Greenberg.
"It's not that you're 'faking' it.
It's really true."
In addition to medication to relieve both depression and pain, many people get relief from cognitive behavioral therapy, yoga, acupuncture, and massage, according to the U.S. Pain Foundation.
03 of 10 Thyroid Problems Your thyroid gland is responsible for regulating your body's metabolism.
Both hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid) and hypothyroidism (an underactive thyroid) can lead to depression, although it's more common with low thyroid levels, said Dr. Hicks.
A diagnosis of depression can also come before any known thyroid problems.
Fortunately, treating thyroid conditions, even thyroid cancer, is fairly straightforward.
Thyroid medications are usually very effective for correcting your mood.
According to UpToDate, other thyroid disorder symptoms include hair loss, gaining or losing weight, fatigue, and feeling cold.
If you have any of these symptoms–with or without a depressed mood–consider having your thyroid checked.
04 of 10 Heart Disease Mood disorders are more common in people with heart disease than those with healthier tickers: Up to 20% of people who've had a heart attack could develop depression, according to the American Heart Association.
The risk of heart disease is also higher among people who have depression.
And having depression can interfere with your recovery from heart disease and other heart conditions, according to a 2014 review in the journal Circulation.
"[Depression] is one of the warning signs that you're going to have a bad prognosis" after a heart attack, Dr. Greenberg said.
That's partly because depression can make it harder to eat, exercise, take medications, and do the other things necessary to recover after heart problems.
There's also evidence that people with depression may have extra-sticky platelets, which can lead to atherosclerosis, a major risk factor for heart attacks, according to Johns Hopkins Medicine.
05 of 10 Lupus Depression is common with autoimmune diseases, and lupus, a disease that spurs your immune system to attack your organs and tissues, is no exception.
A 2016 study published in the Journal of Immunology Research found that depression was associated with the level of lupus disease activity and its effects on the brain.
The stress of dealing with lupus and its symptoms—like unexplained fever, fatigue, joint pain, or rash—on an everyday basis may also lead to depression, as can some lupus medications, according to the Lupus Foundation of America.
06 of 10 Diabetes Depression and diabetes–both type 1 and type 2–may be intertwined in several ways.
Managing diabetes can be draining, which can spark mood changes, according to the American Diabetes Association.
And depression makes it that much harder to take your meds, eat right, and exercise–and skipping those healthy habits can worsen depression and diabetes.
Researchers also think diabetes and depression may share several common pathways, including genetic, hormonal, and immunological causes, according to a 2014 review in Current Diabetes Reports.
Structural changes to certain parts of the brain may also play a role.
Per a 2020 study published in Scientific Reports, depression in people with type 2 diabetes may be associated with damage to areas of the brain involved in mood control.
07 of 10 HIV Living with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, which HIV causes) can be stressful.
Per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, depression is one of the most common mental health conditions persons with HIV face.
HIV can directly damage the brain, leading to depression or HIV dementia (which may be mistaken for depression), according to the American Psychiatric Association.
Some HIV medications–like Sustiva (efavirenz) and Retrovir (zidovudine)–can make depression worse.
Make sure you get depression screening if you have HIV or AIDS.
Feeling low can make it difficult to take the steps necessary to keep your viral load under control.
08 of 10 Other Infections HIV is not the only infection linked to depression.
There are many others, including influenza, herpes, hepatitis C, and the virus that causes chickenpox and shingles.
Experts don't know the nature of the relationship–if the infection causes mood disorders, if depression is a risk factor for infection, or if the two share triggers.
One hypothesis is that inflammatory changes may be the common link, according to a 2020 review published in Neuron.
09 of 10 Multiple Sclerosis Depression is one of the most common symptoms of multiple sclerosis and may appear even before MS does.
"It can be a warning sign that something is amiss and seems to be an indication that MS will be developing," said Dr. Greenberg.
"When you look back and see who gets MS, many of them have had depression, though obviously not for 100% of people."
According to a 2014 review published in Nature Reviews Neurology, MS can damage parts of the brain that regulate mood.
Depression can also be a result of hormonal changes and changes in the immune system that are common with MS.
Corticosteroids—a common treatment for MS—can also lead to depression, per MedlinePlus.
Maria Menounos revealed that she was diagnosed with a rare type of pancreatic cancer in January 2023 — and that she was only able to catch it early because she advocated for herself.
The 44-year-old TV personality, who's currently expecting her first child via surrogate with husband Keven Undergaro, first shared her diagnosis with People magazine on May 3 and joined TODAY on May 4 to detail her journey with the condition.
Menounos told co-anchor Hoda Kotb that she was diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes, which runs in her family, in June 2022.
Then a few months later, in the fall, she remembers experiencing "excruciating pain" while on a plane.
"I didn't think I was going to make it through the flight," she said.
But because she was eating a farro salad at the time, she brushed it off as a sign of gluten intolerance, she recalled.
Then in November, she said she "had excruciating abdominal pain again" coupled with "loose stool," or diarrhea, which lasted for about a month.
To get to the bottom of her symptoms, Menounos pursued various tests, including a CT scan, and stool and blood tests, all of which had "unremarkable" results, she said.
But the pain persisted, and at some points she felt like “someone was tearing my insides out," she told People.
"Anytime I complained about it thereafter, (my doctors told me), 'Well, we just scanned and everything was fine,' but I kept feeling (in) my upper-left quadrant this throbbing," Menounos told Hoda, adding that she knew "something was wrong.
"
So, the former "E! News" host decided to get a full-body MRI, which revealed that she had a 3.9-centimeter mass on her pancreas.
"The mass kept persisting in every image," Menounos said.
"(The radiologist) goes, 'You need to go to the hospital right away.'
And he's white as a ghost and he's shaking.
My eyes started to well, and I just look at him and go, 'So I'm a goner.'
"
She underwent a second MRI, which also confirmed she had a mass.
Still, when she went to get it biopsied, the doctor said he was skeptical that it was anything to worry about, telling her it was likely pancreatitis, or inflammation of the pancreas.
"When I came out, he goes, 'Oh, this is definitely something,'" Menounos continued.
"I remember waking up the next morning, and I hadn't really cried, but I just started guttural crying because I'm like, 'How could God finally bless me with a baby after 10 years?
And now I'm not going to get to meet her.'
"
A biopsy later confirmed it was a stage 2 neuroendocrine pancreatic tumor, which is rare and less deadly than the more common pancreatic cancer diagnosis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Because she was able to catch it early and the type of tumor she had is less aggressive than other pancreatic cancers, she had a good prognosis.
In February, Menounos underwent surgery to remove the tumor, as well as the tail of her pancreas, her entire spleen, 17 lymph nodes and a uterine fibroid "the size of a baby," she told Hoda.
Menounous told People the recovery was "super painful," but she doesn't need any additional treatment, just annual scans for the next five years.
First pancreatic cancer symptoms
Pancreatic cancer has the lowest five-year survival rate of all major cancers at 12%, according to the Pancreatic Cancer Action Network.
But Menounos' type of pancreatic tumor has a better prognosis on average, according to the American Cancer Society.
Its overall five-year survival rate is 53%, per the ACS.
Pancreatic cancer doesn't usually cause symptoms and therefore usually isn't detected until it has spread outside the pancreas, making it more difficult to treat.
Pancreatic tumors also often don't show up in most medical imaging, as was the case with Menounos.
And because the pancreas sits so deep inside the abdomen, patients aren't able to feel it, as they might with breast cancer, for example.
What's more, the early symptoms of pancreatic cancer can be vague and attributed to other conditions.
So that's why experts in treating it recommend knowing the early signs and advocating for yourself if you experience any of them, especially for more than a few weeks.
With Menounos' type of tumor, symptoms vary but usually include "acid reflux, burning abdominal pain ... other gastrointestinal symptoms," a more general pain in the body or jaundice, according to the Pancreatic Cancer Action Network.
Many pancreatic cancer patients say their first symptoms were stomach or back pain, which may come and go initially, or get worse after meals or when lying down, according to Cleveland Clinic.
Menounos said she'd have "bouts of severe abdominal pain, and then it would go away.
...
I kept telling people this doesn't feel right.
"
Other common early pancreatic cancer symptoms, according to Dr. Suneel Kamath, pancreatic oncologist at Cleveland Clinic, include: fatigue; sudden, rapid weight loss; and pain in the middle of the stomach under the breast bone.
But not everyone gets these.
“What happens a lot of times is people either think it’s just acid reflux, that they ate something funny or they ascribe it to some other thing for a while,” Kamath previously told TODAY.com.
“They’ll see their doctors and many of them will be started on acid reflux medicines or other things targeting general stomach issues.
"
"That’s why I emphasize anything that goes on for ...
five, six weeks at a time isn’t going to be your garden variety reflux, indigestion, constipation-related stuff," he continued, adding that because pancreatic cancer is still pretty rare, most doctors won't assume these symptoms could be a sign of it.
Alex Trebek, who died of pancreatic cancer in 2020 after being diagnosed less than two years before, shared in a 2019 PSA that one of his first symptoms was "persistent stomach pain."
Patrick Swayze, who died in 2009, had jaundice as one of his first pancreatic cancer symptoms, which is common, per the ACS.
“He came to me and he said, ‘Do my eyes look yellow?’”
his widow, Lisa Niemi Swayze, recently told TODAY.com.
“He had some digestive problems, pain that wouldn’t go away.
But it was mostly the yellow eyes that sent us to the doctor.
He said, ‘Oh, we’ll go in next week.’
But I thought, ‘Yellow eyes just doesn’t sound normal.
We need to go tomorrow.’
”
Menounos said one of her goals of sharing her story is "to sound the alarms to everybody that you have to be the CEO of your health. ...
You know your body.
You know what's going on.
I'm grateful that I'm in this position, and I know God made this all happen for me to be able to help other people.
"
"I'm just so lucky that I'm going to be able to hold my baby in the summer," she added.
"That's the best blessing of all.
CLARIFICATION (May 4, 2023; 8:55 A.M. ET):
This story has been updated to clarify that the type of tumor Menounos had, a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, is different from the more common diagnosis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
It should be simple: you're diagnosed with celiac disease or non-celiac gluten sensitivity, you go gluten-free, and end of problem — you feel great again, with no lingering symptoms.
Unfortunately, it's frequently far from that easy.
Studies and anecdotal evidence indicate that a fairly high percentage of people with celiac and gluten sensitivity — it's not clear exactly how high, but possibly upwards of half — continues to have symptoms even though they believe they're following a strict gluten-free diet.
This can be incredibly discouraging, and it frequently leads people to believe they've become intolerant to numerous other foods (soy usually heads the list, with corn and other grains not far behind).
However, at least one study involving celiac patients shows that the majority actually are suffering the effects of ongoing gluten ingestion — not "additional intolerances" to various foods, or some other problem.
Moyo Studio / Getty Images
Why Is It So Tough to Be Perfectly Gluten-Free?
Gluten is everywhere, and in people with celiac and gluten sensitivity who react to very small amounts, it can be nearly impossible to avoid.
It can hide in places you don't expect, such as prescription medications and gourmet meats.
It also can appear in trace amounts in foods that appear gluten-free by their ingredients lists.﻿﻿
In many cases, grain-based "gluten-free" products are top suspects.
For example, a 2010 study of gluten in "gluten-free" grains found gluten cross-contamination in amounts ranging from barely detectable (around 5 parts per million) to nearly 3,000 parts per million (enough to cause an epic glutening).
Celiac disease experts, including Peter Green, MD, director of the Celiac Disease Center at Columbia University, say that helping patients with ongoing symptoms despite a careful gluten-free diet is a major priority.
In 2011, Dr. Green said that a drug designed to mitigate the effects of cross-contamination would be a huge boon to celiac patients with ongoing symptoms.﻿﻿
So How Many People Are Affected By Continuing Symptoms?
That's not clear, although there are some hints in the medical literature for people with celiac disease.
(There aren't any studies touching on gluten sensitivity, but anecdotal evidence indicates many of those with that condition also suffer from ongoing symptoms.)﻿﻿
In a 2003 study published in the American Journal of Gastroenterology, researchers studied a group of adult celiacs who had been gluten-free for between eight and 12 years.
They found the subjects with celiac disease reported "significantly more gastrointestinal symptoms than the general population," including indigestion, diarrhea, constipation, abdominal pain, and reflux.
In fact, some 60% of those celiacs studied experienced frequent symptoms, compared to 29% of the general population.
Women tended to fare worse than men.
Another study of "irritable bowel-type symptoms" in people who had been diagnosed with celiac disease a year ago or more found that more than 23% suffered from continuing bowel symptoms that were serious enough to meet the criteria for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), and most sought help for their symptoms.
Those with IBS symptoms were more likely to be female and to stray occasionally from the gluten-free diet, the study found.﻿﻿
In that study, people with IBS symptoms also were more likely to have a "probable mental disorder," as determined by a questionnaire that looked for signs of anxiety and depression.
However, it should be noted that many people with celiac disease report symptoms of anxiety and depression when they ingest small amounts of gluten.
Another study looked at 112 patients referred to a London hospital with nonresponsive celiac disease (12 of whom, it turned out, didn't have celiac disease after all).
Of the remaining 100 people, the study found that 45% "were not adequately adhering to a strict gluten-free diet," with slightly more than half of those inadvertently ingesting gluten and slightly under half intentionally cheating.﻿﻿
Finally, an unpublished study presented by Alvine Pharmaceuticals at a 2012 medical meeting found that a "large" (but unspecified) percentage of diagnosed celiacs continue to experience symptoms despite adhering to a strict gluten-free diet.
Those symptoms listed by subjects in the Alvine study sound like a laundry list of typical celiac complaints: flatulence, abdominal pain, fatigue, bloating, diarrhea, constipation, nausea, brain fog, headaches, and skin rashes.
They're also discouragingly frequent: 90% of those studied said they had at least one day of symptoms in a week's time, and 44% said they experienced five to 10 different symptoms in a week.
What Can You Do If You Still Have Symptoms?
Your first step should be to consider a trip to your healthcare provider to make certain you haven't been misdiagnosed.
In one of the studies mentioned above, 11% of those with diagnosed celiac disease and continuing symptoms turned out not to have celiac disease at all!
Others may have both celiac disease and another condition that's causing their continuing symptoms.
Keep in mind, though, that even if you weren't diagnosed correctly with celiac disease, you could still suffer from gluten sensitivity.
The treatment is the same for both: a strict gluten-free diet.
If you're confident gluten is your problem, then you probably need to examine your diet for hidden gluten.
If you're not consuming any of those, take a hard look at the rest of your diet: restaurant meals, lots of processed foods (even if they're labeled "gluten-free") and an over-abundance of "gluten-free" grain products might lead you to ingest more trace gluten than your body can handle.
Pay particular attention to the testing levels for your favorite "gluten-free"-labeled products — you may need to eat only certified gluten-free products or to avoid most grains since they tend to be quite contaminated with gluten.
In some cases, you may need to look into whether you're reacting to foods other than gluten — it's common for people with celiac disease to also have lactose intolerance, for example, and many people report distinctly different reactions to soy and corn, both highly allergenic foods in their own right.
In many cases, though, eliminating low levels of gluten will do the trick.
If all else fails, you may want to consider consulting with a dietitian who is well-versed on the gluten-free diet — that person may be able to spot problems you may have missed, such as inadvertent cross-contamination that results from a shared kitchen, or exposures at work.
Above all, don't start to fear food — it absolutely is possible to eat a varied and interesting diet that also eliminates symptoms almost completely.
Our product picks are editor-tested, expert-approved.
We may earn a commission through links on our site.
Why Trust Us?
You had a great run.
You sailed through the steady-state parts and even tackled the toughest moments of the set like a pro.
All good, except...cough, cough, hack, what?
Nothing can break your post-run euphoria quite like a coughing fit.
But why are you hacking now when you breathed just fine during your workout?
Before you worry that your cough is a symptom of the novel coronavirus disease, COVID-19, consider this: Coughing during or after exercise is a common symptom of a condition called exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB), which occurs when the airways in your lungs narrow temporarily in response to any kind of physical activity that revs up your heart rate.
(To understand more about what a COVID-19 dry cough is like, check the information here.)
“This makes it more difficult for the air to get through into the lungs,” says Jonathan Parsons, M.D., director of the Ohio State University Multidisciplinary Cough Program.
It’s similar to what happens to your lungs during asthma.
In fact, EIB used to be known as “exercise-induced asthma.”
But unlike asthma, where attacks can be triggered by a variety of things like smoke, pollen, mold, pet dander, or viruses, EIB is sparked only by exercise.
Most asthmatics have suffered EIB symptoms during some point in their lives, says Dr. Parsons.
So if you have asthma, you may already know exercise can cause some distress.
But EIB can affect up to an estimated 15 percent of the general, asthma-free population.
It can be annoying and uncomfortable, but in many cases there are things you can do to prevent it from happening.
Some are little tweaks you can make before your workout to keep your airways from rebelling and causing you to cough; others require a prescription.
But whether your cough is severe or just a little bothersome, it's worth calling a doctor when symptoms develop—some other conditions can cause the same symptoms and you'll want to get the right diagnosis.
Here’s how to spot the signs and get the right treatment for the condition.
How do you know if running is what's causing your cough?
Symptoms of EIB are nonspecific, meaning they’re similar to those caused by other conditions.
Common signs include shortness of breath, tightness in your chest, cough, wheezing, and difficulty getting air into your lungs.
You might also feel like you have decreased endurance or abdominal discomfort.
The symptoms are often mild to moderate: You may just feel a slight wheeze or a bit of tightness in your chest—more of an annoyance than anything more serious.
But the attacks can also be severe, requiring you to stop what you’re doing to catch your breath.
In some cases, you may even need to go to the emergency room to get your breathing back under control.
How much exercise does it take to bring the problem on?
Usually it takes about 10 to 15 minutes of exercise to provoke an EIB episode, Dr. Parsons says.
Any exercise that speeds up your heart rate can trigger the condition, though it’s much more common in endurance athletes, like runners, swimmers, and triathletes.
EIB can pop up after short, intense bouts of exercise as well, like sprinting or even circuit training without rest periods.
Roberto Westbrook // Getty Images
What else triggers coughing after running
The kind of air you breathe can play a role, too.
EIB tends to flare more when the air lacks humidity, which is common on cold days.
So that may be one reason why your outdoor runs leave you with a cough when there's a cold snap.
“Your lungs don’t like dry air,” says Dr. Parsons.
“So the airways try to humidify it, and when they do, they become dehydrated.
Dehydrated airways are irritable and much more likely to constrict or narrow.”
How do you know you have exercise-induced bronchoconstriction?
If you’ve been noticing symptoms of EIB, make an appointment with your primary care doctor.
Simply taking medications on the basis of your symptoms alone can prevent you from knowing if you have the condition.
Your doctor will order a series of tests that measure your lung functions, says Dr. Parsons.
The first test assesses your lungs at rest.
Then your doc will ask you to exercise on either a treadmill or a track, and take another resting test.
If there’s a decline in your lung function after exercising, you may have EIB.
How do you treat that post-run cough?
Once you receive a diagnosis, you’ll probably be given a rescue inhaler like Albuterol, which helps you breathe better by relaxing and opening the airways that go to your lungs.
Take a couple puffs 15 to 20 minutes before starting exercise.
Don't wait until you're done and the cough is flaring up.
Hearst Magazines Subscribe to Men's Health Now 73% Off Subscribe Now Credit: .
The inhaler will help you prevent another EIB episode from occurring, instead of waiting for it to happen and then reacting to it, Dr. Parsons says.
“It’s effective in about 80 to 90 percent of patients.”
The treatment should be enough to allow you to zip through a sweat session without any symptoms, but make sure to keep your inhaler handy during your workout just in case.
If you’re still feeling symptoms even after you take the Albuterol, your doc may start you on a daily inhaled corticosteroid, too.
He or she might also want to rule out other conditions that can cause similar symptoms, like vocal cord dysfunction, uncontrolled allergies, post nasal drip, or even acid reflux.
Many people don’t realize that unexplained coughing can be a symptom of acid reflux (and even fewer know that taking care of that acid reflux might not mean giving up all the foods you love like coffee, citrus fruits, and tomatoes).
Are there ways to prevent that cough you get after running?
Whether you use an inhaler or not, don’t dive right into exercise (your joints will thank you for this, too).
Research has shown that 10 to 15 minutes of moderately intense exercise can reduce the risk of EIB attacks from occurring afterward.
The goal of this warmup is to raise your core temperature a little bit.
That means walk or jog slowly before you break out in your full-on run, or spin in a small gear if you’re on your bike.
In addition to reducing your chances of coughing after running, this also helps warm up the synovial fluid in your joints so they’re better ready to serve you in a tough or steady-state mainset.
And if you’re going to run outside in cold, dry air—less than 32 degrees Fahrenheit—consider wearing a mask or a scarf to help your lungs out, says Dr. Parsons.
(Check out these comfortable face mask options that support charity.)
“When you put a scarf around your mouth, it’ll get a little moist as you breathe,” he says.
“That will help humidify the air and warm it up as well.”
This Morning: Guest reveals symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency
Vitamin B12 may be lacking from your body if you're experiencing one heart racing symptom.
And it's not the only problem you'll encounter if you don't treat the underlying cause.
Foods rich in vitamin B12 include cheese, salmon, eggs and meat.
However, you may be unable to absorb the nutrient in your gut – this condition is called pernicious anaemia.
Or, as the NHS added, it may be the result of taking certain medication.
Trending
READ MORE Vitamin B12 deficiency symptoms: The tingling sensation you may feel To be more specific, anticonvulsants and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) can affect how much your body absorbs vitamin B12.
Perhaps it's due to advancing age.
The NHS stated: "It becomes more difficult to absorb vitamin B12 as you get older."
In fact, the national health body suspects "one in 10 people aged 75 or over" will have a vitamin B12 deficiency.
So, how can you tell if you're lacking in the vital nutrient or not?
READ MORE:
Bowel cancer warning - why your heartburn could be caused by something serious
Vitamin B12 deficiency:
One heart racing symptom, what could it be?
SUBSCRIBE Invalid email We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you.
This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding.
You can unsubscribe at any time.
Read our Privacy Policy
Experiencing AF increases a person's risk of having a stroke by five times – so it's certainly a condition to keep an eye on.
Triggers for an irregular heartbeat include viral illnesses, alcohol, tobacco, exercise, caffeine and changes in posture.
An irregular heart beat is the result of an abnormality of the heart's rhythm.
But what about the vitamin B12 deficiency?
Are there other signs you're struggling to get the nutrients you need?
Vitamin B12 deficiency: A cheese sandwich would contain vitamin B12
READ MORE Vitamin B12 deficiency: Warning sign in your hands
Yes, the Mayo Clinic outlines other symptoms you may experience if you're deficient in vitamin B12.
For example, some people may feel fatigued and could feel numbness or tingling in their hands and feet.
Other symptoms may involve muscle weakness, weight loss and pale or yellowish skin.
Furthermore, dizziness may be a factor, as well as shortness of breath and unsteady movements.
Vitamin B12 deficiency: The gut may have trouble absorbing the nutrient
The Washington Post is providing this news free to all readers as a public service.
Follow this story and more by signing up for national breaking news email alerts.
A 13-year-old boy from Claremont, California, suddenly died on Thursday after weeks of experiencing COVID-19 symptoms, per several reports.
Maxx Cheng first began experiencing symptoms of the virus on the Fourth of July.
His family told both ABC News and CBS Los Angeles that a COVID-19 test came back negative, but that they still believe the virus could have caused his death.
“His symptoms matched, but then the test came out negative,” Charlotte Cheng, his sister, told CBS.
“So we were a little bit confused.”
Even though the test was negative, Maxx continued to self-isolate in his room due to the continued symptoms.
When his family went to go check in on him last week, they found him unconscious in his room.
"We went to go check up on him, like we normally do,” Charlotte explained.
“He wasn’t answering.
We found him passed out in the room.”
According to his family, Maxx experienced "nausea, vomiting, chest pains," but his symptoms had seemed to improve in the days leading up to his death.
“There was almost no cough,” Charlotte said.
“The fever had gone down three days before he passed.”
Never miss a story — sign up for PEOPLE's free daily newsletter to stay up-to-date on the best of what PEOPLE has to offer, from juicy celebrity news to compelling human interest stories
News of Maxx's death sent shockwaves through his community, and a GoFundMe has been set up to help cover the costs of funeral arrangements.
"It's very, very shocking, saddening, paralyzing," said Nicole Weinstein, a family friend told ABC.
"The minute I heard, it was like a huge bright light had been extinguished.
He had so much charisma, so much positive energy.
He was class president last year.
"
Any additional funds raised will be put towards a college fund for Maxx's twin brother, Leo.
"Maxx Cheng was one of Claremont's finest young men who was recently lost during this pandemic," the fundraiser reads.
"Maxx was athletic, intelligent, funny, and mature and was voted Class President of Chaparral Elementary before heading off to El Roble.
He played the viola with El Roble’s orchestra, was part of El Roble's Speech and Debate team and competed in swimming (photo here at his recent competition).
"
A coroner is currently working on an autopsy report to determine Maxx’s cause of death, and is running additional tests to determine if his death was caused by the virus.
The report is expected in the coming days.
As information about the coronavirus pandemic rapidly changes, PEOPLE is committed to providing the most recent data in our coverage.
Some of the information in this story may have changed after publication.
For the latest on COVID-19, readers are encouraged to use online resources from CDC, WHO, and local public health departments.
PEOPLE has partnered with GoFundMe to raise money for the COVID-19 Relief Fund, a GoFundMe.org fundraiser to support everything from frontline responders to families in need, as well as organizations helping communities.
For more information or to donate, click here.
With the list of COVID variants growing longer, so have the number of symptoms associated with COVID gone up.
From fever and cough to heart conditions, diabetes and even osteoporosis, at this point, if you have it, chances are, it could be COVID.
The newest COVID variant taking the world by storm is Omicron's stealthy sub-variant BA.2, and it seems to have brought on a new barrage of gastrointestinal symptoms with it.
Many COVID patients across the world are now complaining of mostly gastrointestinal symptoms, with hardly any pulmonary symptoms.
So how exactly did a respiratory virus turn into a stomach bug?
How does COVID impact gut health?
FIT speaks to Dr Lovkesh Anand, Consultant-Medical Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Manipal Hospital, Dwarka, and Dr Ashwini Setya, a leading gastroenterologist in New Delhi.
A new model of alpha-synuclein in Parkinson’s development, addressing both where aggregates first appear and their spread through the nervous system, may explain the variety of early symptoms, asymmetry in motor symptoms, and variability of disease progression seen in patients, a study reported.
The study, “The α-Synuclein Origin and Connectome Model (SOC Model) of Parkinson’s Disease: Explaining Motor Asymmetry, Non-Motor Phenotypes, and Cognitive Decline,” was published in the Journal of Parkinson’s Disease.
In Parkinson’s disease, symptoms and progression can vary greatly, with most patients experiencing initial motor symptoms on one side of the body (asymmetrically).
Early signs in others include constipation, loss of smell, and sleep disorders, which can occur years before diagnosis.
However, the underlying causes that lead to such a wide variety of disease characteristics and progression remain poorly understood.
To explain this variation, Per Borghammer, MD, PhD, at the Aarhus University Hospital in Denmark, proposed the alpha-synuclein Origin and Connectome (SOC) model based on evidence from clinical and imaging studies, postmortem findings in patients’ brain tissue, and Parkinson’s animal models.
“Imaging studies of living [Parkinson’s] patients and studies of biopsies and gut and brain tissue from biobanks clearly suggest that patients display different profiles of neuronal damage,” Borghammer said in a press release.
“In some patients, the brain is damaged before the peripheral nervous system [that outside the brain and spinal cord], and in others, the opposite pattern is seen.”
The model proposes that Parkinson’s starts at one location with clumping of the protein alpha-synuclein within a single or very few closely situated nerve cells (neurons).
Its second component — called the connectome — describes how neurons are connected, known as neuronal connectivity, allowing for toxic protein spread.
According to the SOC model, if the original site is in the peripheral nervous system of the gut, this leads to the so-called body-first subtype of Parkinson’s (as opposed to brain-first).
Body-first disease is characterized by early symptoms in the gut and other organs as well as the lower brain stem, which affects sleep.
Disease will develop relatively slowly in body-first individuals prior to a diagnosis, because multiple neurons separate the gut nervous system from that of the brain.
Furthermore, these patients have more symmetric motor symptoms due to the disease spreading from the gut to the brain in a more symmetric fashion, caused by overlapping connections in the peripheral nervous system.
The model also predicts that, at diagnosis, body-first patients have a greater, and more symmetric, burden of alpha-synuclein disease, which promotes faster progression and cognitive decline.
“It is known that patients of the body-first type are at an increased risk of developing dementia,” Borghammer said.
“According to the SOC model, this increased risk follows from the fact that, at the time of a diagnosis, the alpha-synuclein pathology [disease] is more widespread, more symmetrical, and shows more involvement of certain brainstem neurons, which are themselves involved in cognitive decline and dementia.”
In contrast, the brain-first subtype has the brain as the initial site of protein clumping.
This subtype is characterized by a shorter pre-diagnostic phase, slower motor and non-motor progression, less frequent sleep problems, and less rapid cognitive decline.
In brain-first patients, Parkinson’s is also more often asymmetric, as alpha-synuclein disease originates in either the left or right side of the brain (hemispheres), then spreads within the same hemisphere, leading to one-sided motor symptoms.
As the disease progresses and alpha-synuclein spreads to the other brain hemisphere and throughout the body, brain-first and body-first types of patients eventually have similar motor and non-motor symptoms.
“In short, we think that the motor asymmetry in [Parkinson’s] must be understood in a brain-first vs. body-first context,” said Borghammer.
“In brain-first [Parkinson’s], the initial pathology starts in one hemisphere and initially damages that hemisphere via the predominantly same-sided connections, leading to marked asymmetry.
“With time, the other hemisphere is also involved, evidenced by the increasingly symmetric motor symptoms in the patient,” he added.
The SOC model applies to all diseases characterized by the presence of Lewy bodies or alpha-synuclein clumps.
Moreover, it incorporates the significant roles of other factors, including inflammation, infection, gut microbes, genetics, calcium regulation, alterations to energy-producing mitochondria in cells, and oxidative stress (the imbalance between the production and detoxification of free radicals by metabolism).
“A good scientific model should be testable and falsifiable, and the present model lives up to these requirements,” Borghammer concluded.
“The scientific community now needs to study whether the SOC model has more explanatory power than previous models” of Parkinson’s development.
“It is certainly not a complete description of what goes wrong in [Parkinson’s disease] and needs to be further refined,” he added.
A Scots family were left speechless when four-year-old Calum Rae's fever after suffering from chicken pox turned out to stem from a tumour on his kidney
A mum has spoken of her heartbreak after her son's symptoms she thought were from chickenpox turned out to be cancer.
Calum Rae, four, had been complaining of ache and pain in the aftermath of the infection when he was taken to hospital, only to be given the devastating blow.
Doctors told the family that the four-year-old's symptoms were actually stemming from a tumour near his kidney.
Mum Victoria McDonald told how her son had caught chicken pox earlier this year in January, but when the sores began to fade Calum was still suffering with pain across his body.
But when the youngster developed night sweats, a high temperature and felt no longer able to walk, 33-year-old Victoria rushed him to the family's local hospital near Troon, South Ayrshire, and was left "numb" when she and partner Adam Ray were delivered the news.
Image: Victoria MacDonald / SWNS)
Victoria MacDonald / SWNS) Image: Victoria MacDonald / SWNS)
Victoria MacDonald / SWNS)
"When we took Calum there he was in an incredible amount of pain," he mum-of-two told Glasgow Live.
"He'd ask us to hold his neck, his stomach and back to help with the pain.
"
The tumour, which was located just above Calum's adrenal gland, led to a diagnosis of high risk neuroblastoma stage m which will likely return, even after chemotherapy.
"After the first cycle of chemo all the pain just seemed to go away," said Victoria.
"He has just finished cycle six
and he has another two rounds.
"After that he needs to get surgery to remove the tumour if they can remove it, then he needs high dose chemotherapy followed by a stem cell transplant, which is when they can become incredibly unwell.
"The whole process will take 12 to 14 months.
"
Image: Victoria MacDonald / SWNS)
Victoria MacDonald / SWNS)
Victoria said Calum's attitude has been "amazing", and despite the gruelling chemo the youngster is still "wanting to play all the time", and is even learning to ride his first bike.
"Calum takes everything in his stride.
He has never once questioned why he needs to go to hospital, he just gets on with it.
"He has just accepted that this is his life for now.
Calum is so funny and he has charmed all the nurses and doctors, they all think he is adorable.
"
She added: "He is so young so luckily he doesn't understand the severity, we've just said there are germs in his body that are playing hide and seek.
"It helps that he is determined and strong willed.
He won't take anything lying down.
"
Image: Victoria MacDonald / SWNS)
Victoria MacDonald / SWNS) Image: Victoria MacDonald / SWNS)
Victoria MacDonald / SWNS)
Despite praising NHS staff, the family are currently raising funds for a clinical trial across the Pond that could stop the cancer returning in the future
She said: "The problem is that the cancer comes back.
The survival rate over a five-year period is 40 per cent.
If the cancer comes back it drops even lower.
"So we found this cancer centre in New York and they specialise in neuroblastoma trials and they are trying to find away to stop it coming back.
"After Calum is completely finished treatment, as long as he is completely disease free, he can go straight over and take part.
It is seven vaccines throughout the year and then check ups.
The couple has already raised more than £38,000 - well over their £25k target - to give Calum the best fighting chance.
You can donate to the family's page here.
The New York State Department of Labor (NYSDOL) has published guidance regarding employee cannabis use.
We previously reported on the amendments to New York’s off-duty conduct law—New York Labor Law Section 201-D—which now prohibits employers from discriminating against employees because of their legal cannabis use.
As discussed further below, the NYSDOL’s recent guidance provides some answers, but also raises additional questions and issues that employers should consider when coming into compliance.
The Guidance Provides Some Additional Information on the NYSDOL’s Interpretation of “Impairment.”
While NYLL § 201-D prohibits employers from disciplining an employee because he or she uses cannabis while off-duty, it does not prohibit an employer from disciplining an employee who is “impaired by the use of cannabis” at work.
The statute defines impairment to mean that the employee manifests specific articulable symptoms of impairment that either: (i) decrease or lessen the performance of their duties or tasks; or (ii) interfere with an employer’s obligation to provide a safe and healthy workplace, free from recognized hazards, as required by state and federal occupational safety and health laws.
The guidance is unclear on what these “specific articulable symptoms” might actually look like, settling instead upon general statements.
Specifically, the NYSDOL notes that there is “no dispositive and complete list of symptoms of impairment,” and any such symptoms must be “ objectively observable indications that the employee’s performance of the duties of the position . . .
are decreased or lessened” (emphasis added).
The NYSDOL does offer one example regarding impairment: the unsafe and reckless operation of heavy machinery (though that essentially states the obvious).
However, the NYSDOL guidance does offer some examples of what would not constitute “impairment,” including (i) observable signs of use that do not indicate impairment on their own; or (ii) noticeable odor on its own.
Further, a test for cannabis usage cannot serve as a basis for an employer’s conclusion that an employee was impaired by cannabis.
In addressing what articulable symptoms of impairment may look like, the NYSDOL also cautions employers that some objectively observable indications could be mistaken for indications that an employee has a disability protected by applicable law.
The guidance does not expand upon how employers should distinguish disabilities from articulable symptoms of impairment, adding another layer of complexity to an employer’s efforts to ascertain what constitutes articulable symptoms that may give rise to discipline.
In that same vein, the guidance offers little on what might constitute employee interference with an employer’s obligation to provide a safe and healthy workplace “as required by state and federal occupational safety and health laws”—the second ground that could give rise to employee discipline.
Here, many employers had hoped the NYSDOL would identify the types of roles or job duties it considers “safety sensitive” or at least identify other safety-related scenarios (beyond the aforementioned heavy machinery operation scenario), but it declined to do so.
The Guidance Clarifies an Employer’s Ability to Discipline Based on Use and Possession at the Worksite.
Although significant portions of the NYSDOL guidance highlight actions that employers cannot take, the guidance makes clear that employers may prohibit the use and possession of cannabis during work hours or while at work.
This prohibition extends to time spent on unpaid breaks, meal periods (including where the employee leaves the worksite), while using company vehicles, and while on-call.
As part of this guidance, the NYSDOL also addresses cannabis use in the remote workplace or, in other words, where used by employees at their residence.
Specifically, the guidance explains that while an employee’s residence is not a “worksite” for purposes of NYLL § 201-D, employers may still discipline an employee who, while working remotely in New York State, during work hours, exhibits specific articulable symptoms of impairment that decrease or lessen performance.
The NYSDOL also confirms that employers may prohibit an employee’s possession of cannabis at work, including at a leased and rented space, in company vehicles, and in areas used by employees within such property (e.g., lockers, desks, etc.).
The Guidance Confirms the Circumstances under Which Employers May Drug Test for Cannabis.
The guidance establishes that except in a narrow set of circumstances where an employer is required by law to test for cannabis, an employer “cannot test an employee for cannabis merely because it is allowed or not prohibited under federal law.”
These narrow circumstances, according to the guidance, exist where “federal or state law requires drug testing or makes it a mandatory requirement of the position,” such as for drivers of commercial motor vehicles.
By contrast, where federal law merely permits or does not prohibit drug testing, employers may not drug test for cannabis use.
The Guidance Also Clarifies the Reach of the Law.
The guidance confirms that NYLL § 201-D does not apply to employees working “remotely in another state,” and instead applies only to “employees employed within the State of New York.”
The guidance also confirms that the law does not apply to “individuals who are not employees,” such as non-employee students, independent contractors, or volunteers.
Employees under the age of 21 are also not covered, as the law only permits cannabis use by individuals 21 and over.
Relatedly, an employer may not prohibit or regulate an employee’s cannabis use while the employee is on leave except under narrow circumstances.
Thoughts for Employers and Next Steps
The NYSDOL guidance still leaves some questions unanswered as well as issues for employers to consider.
In particular, employers are mostly left wanting as to what constitutes “articulable symptoms of impairment” to which they may point to discipline an employee.
As discussed above, the NYSDOL noted that there is “no dispositive and complete list of symptoms of impairment.”
Even so, a few illustrative examples would have been helpful, particularly given the notable indicia which are not articulable symptoms of impairment on their own (e.g., bloodshot eyes or odor).
Employers will have to see how this concept is developed in future legal proceedings.
Notably, while the guidance explicitly indicates that “observable signs of use” or a “noticeable odor” do not indicate impairment on their own, the guidance is silent on whether such signs taken together could support an impairment determination, or whether an employer may utilize a drug test to confirm its initial determination based on other observable signs of impairment.
Further, the guidance is silent on whether an employer may rely on the violation of another valid conduct policy to form the basis of disciplinary action.
For example, may the employer take action if the employee conducts a meeting and emits an odor that offends a customer (without attributing that odor to cannabis or something else)?
Employers are also left wanting as to what types of behavior or symptoms would interfere with an employer’s obligation to provide a safe and healthy workplace.
The NYSDOL declined to expand on this exception beyond referencing the unsafe operation of heavy machinery and thus, employers will need to carefully evaluate when to take disciplinary action under these circumstances.
Finally, the off-duty conduct law (NYLL § 201-D) also includes an exception allowing discipline where the employee’s off-duty conduct creates a material conflict with the employer’s trade secrets, proprietary information or other proprietary or business interest.
The guidance did not address this exception, although we can envision scenarios where it could apply.
Given the updated guidance, employers should continue with their compliance efforts, including:
Reviewing existing relevant policies to determine whether and to what extent modifications are needed, including modifications to drug-free workplace policies (especially drug-testing policies) in light of the NYSDOL’s guidance on that issue.
to determine whether and to what extent modifications are needed, including modifications to drug-free workplace policies (especially drug-testing policies) in light of the NYSDOL’s guidance on that issue.
Training supervisors and managers to ensure the proper implementation of new or revised conduct policies and expectations regarding a safe workplace as well as use and possession of cannabis in the workplace.
to ensure the proper implementation of new or revised conduct policies and expectations regarding a safe workplace as well as use and possession of cannabis in the workplace.
Considering the law’s impact on any collective bargaining agreement , including with respect to drug testing and unionized safety-sensitive positions.
, including with respect to drug testing and unionized safety-sensitive positions.
Assessing the roles which the employer considers “safety sensitive.”
Despite the lack of guidance from the NYSDOL on which positions are considered “safety sensitive,” employers should still attempt to assess which positions fit into this category (thus identifying the group for whom they may take action when exhibiting signs of impairment that interfere with the creation of a healthy and safe workplace).
Despite the lack of guidance from the NYSDOL on which positions are considered “safety sensitive,” employers should still attempt to assess which positions fit into this category (thus identifying the group for whom they may take action when exhibiting signs of impairment that interfere with the creation of a healthy and safe workplace).
Clearly communicating the employer’s expectations to employees regarding drug use and possession in the workplace , including by communicating who it considers occupying a safety-sensitive role and by providing guidelines around impairment.
Subscribe To Viewpoints
Hi, I'm Dr. Craig Sawchuk, a clinical psychologist at Mayo Clinic.
And I'm here to talk with you about depression.
Whether you're looking for answers for yourself, a friend, or loved one, understanding the basics of depression can help you take the next step.
Depression is a mood disorder that causes feelings of sadness that won't go away.
Unfortunately, there's a lot of stigma around depression.
Depression isn't a weakness or a character flaw.
It's not about being in a bad mood, and people who experience depression can't just snap out of it.
Depression is a common, serious, and treatable condition.
If you're experiencing depression, you're not alone.
It honestly affects people of all ages and races and biological sexes, income levels and educational backgrounds.
Approximately one in six people will experience a major depressive episode at some point in their lifetime, while up to 16 million adults each year suffer from clinical depression.
There are many types of symptoms that make up depression.
Emotionally, you may feel sad or down or irritable or even apathetic.
Physically, the body really slows down.
You feel tired.
Your sleep is often disrupted.
It's really hard to get yourself motivated.
Your thinking also changes.
It can just be hard to concentrate.
Your thoughts tend to be much more negative.
You can be really hard on yourself, feel hopeless and helpless about things.
And even in some cases, have thoughts of not wanting to live.
Behaviorally, you just want to pull back and withdraw from others, activities, and day-to-day responsibilities.
These symptoms all work together to keep you trapped in a cycle of depression.
Symptoms of depression are different for everyone.
Some symptoms may be a sign of another disorder or medical condition.
That's why it's important to get an accurate diagnosis.
While there's no single cause of depression, most experts believe there's a combination of biological, social, and psychological factors that contribute to depression risk.
Biologically, we think about genetics or a family history of depression, health conditions such as diabetes, heart disease or thyroid disorders, and even hormonal changes that happen over the lifespan, such as pregnancy and menopause.
Changes in brain chemistry, especially disruptions in neurotransmitters like serotonin, that play an important role in regulating many bodily functions, including mood, sleep, and appetite, are thought to play a particularly important role in depression.
Socially stressful and traumatic life events, limited access to resources such as food, housing, and health care, and a lack of social support all contribute to depression risk.
Psychologically, we think of how negative thoughts and problematic coping behaviors, such as avoidance and substance use, increase our vulnerability to depression.
The good news is that treatment helps.
Effective treatments for depression exist and you do have options to see what works best for you.
Lifestyle changes that improve sleep habits, exercise, and address underlying health conditions can be an important first step.
Medications such as antidepressants can be helpful in alleviating depressive symptoms.
Therapy, especially cognitive behavioral therapy, teaches skills to better manage negative thoughts and improve coping behaviors to help break you out of cycles of depression.
Whatever the cause, remember that depression is not your fault and it can be treated.
To help diagnose depression, your health care provider may use a physical exam, lab tests, or a mental health evaluation.
These results will help identify various treatment options that best fit your situation.
Help is available.
You don't have to deal with depression by yourself.
Take the next step and reach out.
If you're hesitant to talk to a health care provider, talk to a friend or loved one about how to get help.
Living with depression isn't easy and you're not alone in your struggles.
Always remember that effective treatments and supports are available to help you start feeling better.
Want to learn more about depression?
Visit mayoclinic.org.
Do take care.
When you're exposed to heat, does it feel like you're burning up?
Does it seem impossible for you to cool off?
Or maybe it's cold that bothers you, chilling you to the bone, leaving you unable to warm up.
Lumina Images / Getty Images
Are you one of those people with fibromyalgia (FMS) and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) who is cold all the time, or hot all the time, or alternately hot or cold while out of sync with the environment?
If any of those scenarios sound familiar to you, you may have a symptom called temperature sensitivity.
Experts don't yet know exactly what causes this symptom, but they've done some compelling research.
Much of it suggests abnormalities in the autonomic nervous system, which deals with homeostasis (your body's ability to keep the temperature and other factors within normal ranges) and our bodies' reactions to different situations, including the "fight or flight" reaction.
With that established, researchers are now able to look deeper into that system to figure out what exactly is going wrong, and they're finding some interesting things.
Temperature Sensitivity in Fibromyalgia
In addition to a decreased body temperature, research shows that people with FMS have trouble adapting to temperature changes and have a reduced pain threshold to both heat and cold stimuli—meaning it takes less extreme temperatures to make you feel pain.
For example, sunlight shining through a car window onto your arm may cause burning pain in you but only mild discomfort in someone else.
A groundbreaking study published in Pain Medicine suggests a reason for our temperature sensitivity, and it's one based on a series of discoveries.
The first step involved people who may be the exact opposite of people with FMS—those who can't feel pain at all.
It's a rare condition that they're born with.
Healthcare providers observed that these people can feel temperature, which was confusing.
Why would the same nerves that could feel one type of stimuli (temperature) not be able to feel another (pain)?
That question led to a discovery: They're not the same nerves at all.
In fact, we have an entirely separate system of nerves that senses temperature.
These nerves are on our blood vessels, and scientists used to think they just dealt with blood flow.
So, it turns out that these special nerves don't just adjust blood flow, they detect temperature.
They then became a logical target for FMS research, since we're known to have both blood flow abnormalities and temperature sensitivity.
Sure enough, researchers found that FMS participants in their study had extra temperature-sensing nerves along special skin blood vessels called AV shunts.
They're in your hands, feet, and face.
The job of AV shunts is to adjust blood flow in response to temperature changes.
You know how when it's really cold , you get rosy cheeks and red, puffy fingers?
That's because the AV shunts are letting in more blood, trying to keep your extremities warm.
This is the first study looking at how this system is involved in our illness, so we can't say for sure whether it's accurate.
However, it is an interesting direction for more research and an explanation that appears to make a lot of sense.
AV shuts may even play a causal role in this condition.
If your abnormally cold hand or feet change color, you may be experiencing a more serious issue called Raynaud's syndrome.
In some cases, Raynaud's can cause tissue damage or other complications.
If you experience this symptom, take extra steps to stay warm and talk to your healthcare provider
about it.
Temperature Sensitivity in ME/CFS
We don't have a lot of research on this symptom in ME/CFS so far, but we have learned a little about it.
One interesting study involved identical twins.
In each set of twins, one sibling had ME/CFS and the other did not.﻿﻿
Researchers found that the ones with ME/CFS did have different responses to cold than their healthy siblings when it came to both pain tolerance (how much pain they could handle) and pain threshold (the point at which the cold became painful).
A study published in Pain revealed something about a process called pain inhibition.﻿﻿ In a healthy person, the brain takes steps to lessen the pain that's anticipated (like when a nurse gives you a shot) or pain that's repeated (like walking on a pebble in your shoe).
In ME/CFS, though, researchers found that the inhibition process was slower to respond to cold stimulation.
They believe this could play a role in the chronic, widespread pain in this disease but point out that more research is needed to confirm this.
A study looking at adolescents with ME/CFS may have uncovered some important information about homeostasis.﻿﻿ Researchers found that when a hand was exposed to cold, the kids with ME/CFS had significantly more shivering and sudden changes in skin color than their healthy counterparts.
Blood flow to the hand also reacted differently in the control group and illness group.
Body temperatures dropped more among the ME/CFS participants, as well.
So, this symptom is established in the medical literature and we have some early findings that more research can be based upon.
A Word From Verywell
So far, we don't have treatments aimed specifically at this symptom.
However, there's a lot we can do in our daily lives to help alleviate it.
There are ways to deal with cold and heat sensitivity.
Also, talk to your healthcare provider about this symptom.
It may help them draw conclusions about what's going on in your body and what might help you feel better.
Scripps Health is the latest local health provider to tighten its focus on patients whose COVID-19 symptoms linger, joining UC San Diego Health in creating its own clinic to offer holistic services to patients whose coronavirus cases have turned into medical marathons.
No one knows quite how many of the 30.3 million Americans so far infected by COV2 are among those often called COVID-19 “long haulers.”
One recent estimate from an international research effort called the COVID Symptom study found that roughly one in eight of the more than 4,000 people who responded to its smartphone-based surveys had symptoms for four weeks or more.
One in 20 said their symptoms, which range from fatigue and shortness of breath to headache and cognitive dysfunction, lasted eight weeks or more.
Advertisement
One in 40 said their condition still had not cleared up 12 or more weeks after symptoms first appeared.
If those estimates are accurate, then about 1.3 million Americans could be expected to have symptoms that last for at least eight weeks, and nearly 700,000 can expect the fight to continue past 12 weeks.
That’s more than 6,000 people among the more than 270,000 infected so far in San Diego County who are likely to continue coping with a panoply of life-altering and so-far-unexplained medical problems for months after they tested negative for infection.
This week brought a bit of hope as COVID survivors shared stories of many long haul symptoms mysteriously resolving after coronavirus vaccination.
Anecdotal estimates speculated that this might be the case for 40 percent of cases or more, though scientifically vetted estimates are not yet available.
Regardless, the health care system is increasingly realizing just what it’s in for as so many come forward asking for help unravelling — and hopefully explaining — the maddening malaise that often prevents a full return to normal living.
Health care systems are starting to get strategic about managing these patients, with Scripps Health set to announce a new COVID Recovery Program that will focus on those with long-lasting symptoms formally called Post-acute COVID-19 Syndrome or “PACS.”
Scripps is set for a soft launch of its program on Tuesday.
UC San Diego Health created a similar Post-COVID Care program about six months ago.
Both take similar approaches, designating medical teams to work with patients who have had positive coronavirus tests and symptoms that have lasted four weeks or longer regardless of whether their illness required a hospital stay.
With the expected volume of long-recovery patients, Scripps has created clinics led by Dr. Bradley Patay in Torrey Pines and Dr. Noemi Doohan in Hillcrest.
For the moment, only pre-selected patients who have primary care doctors in the Scripps system will be accepted in April, but access is expected to increase in May, based on patient demand.
Long COVID-19 affects a range of vital organs throughout the body including the heart, lungs, brain and gastrointestinal tract.
Thus far, no one has fully explained why the majority see their symptoms resolve relatively quickly, but a few are destined for week after week of sometimes-severe complications.
The most common, according to one recent study, are fatigue, shortness of breath, an altered sense of taste or smell, muscle or joint pain, weakness, cough, headache, chest pain, hair loss, cognitive dysfunction, nasal congestion, difficulty sleeping, dizziness, gastrointestinal issues and abnormal heart rate or rhythms.
New research papers appear daily, providing insights that, by themselves, prove nothing.
It is the synthesis of this torrent of new information that will generally reveal the syndrome’s causes and which treatments are most likely to help patients recover.
Long haul symptoms A recent pre-press study of COVID patients in Michigan estimated the following symptoms 30 days after disease onset:
Fatigue 53%
Shortness of breath 44%
Altered sense of taste or smell 19.4%
Muscle or joint pain 18%
Weakness 16%
Cough 16%
Headache 10%
Chest pain/tightness 10%
Hair loss 10%
Cognitive dysfunction 9%
Nasal congestion 8%
Difficulty sleeping 6%
Dizziness 6%
Gastrointestinal issues 5%
Heart rate/rhythm issues 5%
Clinics like those at UCSD and Scripps are designed to concentrate the most-current knowledge about long COVID-19 in one place, making it easier to pursue an individualized treatment plan for each patient and to update them as better information surfaces from the research world.
“We’re trying to bring the best of what we learn from across the country and apply it in a real-world setting for the patients,” said Dr. Anil Keswani, chief medical officer of ambulatory care at Scripps.
UC San Diego has been taking that approach since last summer and has now treated about 450 long COVID-19 patients in its post-COVID-19 clinic, said Dr. Lucy Horton, who runs the clinic with Dr. Michele Ritter, a fellow infectious disease specialist.
Because these patients often must undergo many diagnostic tests and specialist visits to try to get to the bottom of wide-ranging sets of symptoms, it is essential to have a specialist coordinating care, pulling the pieces together into a holistic picture of each patient’s condition, Horton said.
“Our intention is always that the patient is at the center of what we do, and we don’t want to lose sight of that as we are taking an interdisciplinary approach,” Horton said.
“It’s not uncommon for long-haul patients to feel like they are alone, or are struggling to get connected to care.”
Rachael Lackner of San Diego has now had a range of COVID-19 symptoms for nine months including headaches, fatigue, shortness of breath, deep bouts of depression and severe chest pain.
She said that she has been engaged in a never-ending series of specialist visits that have left her wanting a more coordinated system.
But that desire, she added, has a lot to do with finances.
While the Cares Act, federal legislation passed in 2020 to fight the pandemic, mandated that health insurance companies fully cover care for those with active illness, most do not consider chronic COVID-19 to qualify for 100 percent coverage.
While she did not get a bill for an emergency room trip in June, it was back to her plan’s copays and deductibles, Lackner said, when severe chest pains sent her back to the ER in December.
Though she said she understands that copays are a normal part of using one’s health insurance, the 27-year-old freelance marketing and social media consultant said that, because nobody really understands what causes this syndrome, it can be difficult to see the direct benefit of so many tests and visits, each which comes with a $40 or $80 copay.
She wants to do her part helping advance medical knowledge about how the syndrome works, she said, but the costs just keep adding up.
Recently, she said, a neurologist ordered a $350 CAT scan of her brain that she is not sure she’s going to get.
“I still have student loans, a car loan, I work 45 hours a week to make ends meet, so it’s hard to keep paying when I don’t even know if all of the tests will tell me anything,” she said.
Beyond providing for a more integrated experience, Lackner said she hopes that the new long COVID-19 clinics starting to pop up in San Diego bring greater opportunity to participate in the clinical trials that will ultimately deliver the answers that everyone seeks.
Trials, she added, often pay for the diagnostic tests and office visits that they require, a significant boon to anyone feeling coronavirus’s financial pinch.
“I want to get both myself and other people answers,” she said.
“But I’m not totally sure I can pay for it all on my dime.”
In the meantime, she said, she intends to test the theory that vaccination might make at least some symptoms clear up.
She had an appointment for her first shot on Saturday.
Keswani, the Scripps chief medical officer , said that there is a definite desire locally to embark on long COVID-19 research, though that kind of work needs financial backers.
Scripps, he said, is preparing to apply to participate in a new PASC Initiative from the National Institutes of Health.
Congress approved $1.15 billion for a prolonged research effort, spread over four years, to determine causes of and treatments for PACS.
According to San Diego County’s latest count, about 910,000 of San Diego’s 3.3 million residents are covered by Medi-Cal, the state’s health insurance program for disadvantaged residents.
Scripps said its COVID Recovery Program will serve those on Medi-Cal at its Hillcrest location.
It was not clear whether the UCSD post-COVID program also covers Medi-Cal enrollees,
Scripps will include those with Medi-Cal health coverage in its COVID Recovery Program.
It was not clear if UCSD also includes the last-resort coverage.
Sign up to our free Living Well email for advice on living a happier, healthier and longer life Live your life healthier and happier with our free weekly Living Well newsletter Please enter a valid email address Please enter a valid email address SIGN UP
I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent.
Read our privacy policy Thanks for signing up to the
Living Well email {{ #verifyErrors }} {{ message }} {{ /verifyErrors }} {{ ^verifyErrors }} Something went wrong.
Please try again later {{ /verifyErrors }}
We’re finally starting to talk more about menopause, but what about perimenopause?
Just like menopause, it can have a significant impact – particularly emotionally and mentally, with 86% of women saying they experienced mental health issues as a result, according to a new survey by Healthandher.com.
For 58%, low energy and motivation were the main issues, while 53% said it was low mood and depression, along with anxiety (50%), anger and mood swings (42%).
One in 10 even said they’d had suicidal thoughts, the poll of 2,000 UK women found.
So, what do women need to know?
We talked to leading gynaecologist Dr Nitu Bajekal (nitubajekal.com) to find out more…
What is perimenopause?
Menopause is generally when your periods stop, and you haven’t had a period for 12 consecutive months.
It’s a natural part of ageing that occurs when oestrogen levels drop, but it can cause a host of physical and mental symptoms, ranging from mild to debilitating.
“The average age for menopause is anywhere between 45 and 55, with most becoming menopausal around 51,” says Dr Bajekal (although some can experience it even earlier).
“Perimenopause means ‘menopause in transition’.
It’s the time leading up to the complete cessation of periods.
This usually lasts around four years but can last anywhere from two to eight years.
So, you can see if your periods are going to stop at 45, some women with perimenopause can start to have symptoms in their late-30s, and many people don’t realise that.”
What are the signs of perimenopause?
The symptoms are basically the same as with menopause – like hot flushes, sleep problems, reduced sex drive, low mood, anxiety and just not feeling like yourself.
Some people experience things like brain fog and difficulty concentrating.
With perimenopause though, Dr Bajekal says symptoms can “wax and wane”, and your periods may become irregular for a few months, then return to normal for a bit.
This up and down pattern can add to the mental health impact: “You might sometimes think you’re going crazy, because for two or three months you’re having symptoms, then you’re not, your hormone levels fluctuate.
You think, ‘Did I imagine that?
Is this really happening?’”
Why is perimenopause awareness important?Dr
Bajekal agrees “there is a lack of awareness”, amongst women themselves and sometimes healthcare professionals too.
This means not only might women be missing out on treatments and advice that could help them, not knowing exactly what’s going on can make issues worse.
“Empowering women with knowledge is key, because once you know something, you’re not so scared of it,” says Bajekal.
“You’re not overthinking it, your brain isn’t going into overdrive thinking, ‘Oh God, what’s wrong with me?
Do I need anti-depressants, why do I sometimes not feel like doing anything, why do I feel a bit removed from my relationship?’”
Dr Bajekal says it’s important women don’t feel “fobbed off” by their GPs
But it’s also important doctors investigate any other possible underlying causes if necessary: “Because people may be depressed, for example.
But it’s about being open to the idea that perimenopause is something that also needs to get the attention it hasn’t [been getting].”
How can your doctor help with perimenopause?Perimenopause isn’t something that’s diagnosed with tests, explains Bajekal (although some people may have tests to check for other possible causes).
But if you’re experiencing symptoms that suggest perimenopause and they’re having a detrimental impact, you could try hormone replacement therapy.
Your GP can arrange a trial to see if it helps.
And if your doctor just dismisses it or tells you to come back when you’re 50?
Dr Bajekal recommends asking to see someone with a special interest in this topic.
“Within the GP group, there will be people who have special interest in, say, cholesterol, high blood pressure, diabetes, women’s health and menopause,” she says.
Knowledge is powerAs mentioned, Dr Bajekal says just having these conversations, and having your worries explained and validated, can be extremely helpful.
“It’s about being more aware of the symptoms, the condition, and then women can decide what they need,” she says.
“Do I just need to learn more about this so I can feel empowered?
Do I need hormone replacement?
Do I need to see someone about my mood?”
She is a huge advocate for the role of lifestyle too, citing nutrition, sleep and regular exercise as key.
Bajekal says a diet loaded with plants and wholefoods – with plenty of legumes, beans, wholegrains, soya, leafy green veg and fruit – is rich in fibre, nutrients and plant oestrogens.
This is good news for health in general and for supporting yourself through perimenopause, helping balance hormones and inflammation.
“And stress,” says Bajekal.
“Identify your sources of stress and find ways of managing it, whether it’s through breathwork, yoga, meditation, walking with a friend.
Avoiding alcohol and excessive caffeine and smoking; all these can make menopause and perimenopause worse.
Whether you take medication or not,” she adds,” lifestyle should always be there – the nutrition, the exercise, the laughing with friends and looking after your mental health.”
Never ignore red flags
Dr Bajekal’s final advice?
Even if you’re pretty certain you’re perimenopausal, never ignore gynaecological changes that may need to be checked out more thoroughly and stay up to date with smear tests.
“I see it every day, patients who’ve been told, ‘Don’t worry, you’re having heavy periods because you’re heading to the menopause’.
No – it’s not normal.
If you’re having heavy periods, very irregular periods, new pain in your periods, you should not ignore it.
And if you’re having pain or bleeding after sex, make sure it’s investigated.”
It might be nothing, or there might be something else – possibly serious – going on.
Getting things checked will either put your mind at rest or help ensure you get treatment quickly.
Dr Faheem Younous, Chief of Infectious Diseases at University of Maryland Upper Chesapeake Health, US, and a frontline Covid warrior, recently used the term 'Air Hunger' in one of his tweets while describing the main symptom of COVID-19 patients.
Emphasising on the coronavirus crisis, he wrote, "I've worked in a hospital for 25-years.
Never before, have I seen >50 patients admitted to our hospital with ONE diagnosis: COVID.
ONE symptom: air hunger.
I've worked in a hospital for 25-years.
Never before, have I seen >50 patients admitted to our hospital with ONE diagnosis: COVID.
ONE symptom: air hunger.
This "hoax" is unlike anything we've ever seen before.
You don't want to experience it to believe it.
- Faheem Younus, MD (@FaheemYounus) November 30, 2020
However
, there were many who did not quite get the term.
So, what is Air Hunger?
The coronavirus is known to cause respiratory infection in patients who are affected by it.
Air Hunger is a symptom of the damage done to the lungs by the infection brought on by COVID-19.
Air Hunger is essentially a feeling of severe breathlessness as a result of poorly functioning lungs.
Harvard Medical School describes Air Hunger as, "When the drive to breathe is very high, as it might be with exercise or an infection, a person often develops a sensation of a strong urge to breathe or a feeling of severe breathlessness, known as air hunger.
"
According to Christopher M. Worsham, MD, research fellow in the Harvard Medical School department of health care policy, Air Hunger is caused by an increase in medullary respiratory drive extended to the cerebral cortex and made better by tidal inflation of the lungs.
Patients suffering from air hunger often need to be put on mechanical ventilators for treatment.
Some of the other symptoms of coronavirus are believed to be lack of smell and taste.
Meanwhile, the number of COVID-19 cases in the US is increasing at a brisk pace.
The total number of cases has reached 13.4 million with 266,895 COVID-19 related deaths.
The US is currently the country with the most number of COVID-19 cases in the world.
Also Read: Coronavirus vaccine: List of top candidates, storage, price; all you need to know
Also Read: ICMR, DCGI probe alleged reaction to SII-AstraZeneca vaccine shot, trial continues
Also Read: UK to become 1st country to approve Pfizer's coronavirus vaccine; approval likely by next week
By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy .
You can opt-out at any time.
Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go.
download the app
Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily.
Read preview
Infectious mononucleosis, or mono, is a common contagious illness.
But the virus that causes it — Epstein Barr virus (EBV) — is even more prevalent than you might think.
Even if you've never had symptoms of mono, there's a good chance you've had EBV.
For example, a survey conducted from 2003 to 2010 found that more than 80% of people ages 18 to 19 had antibodies to the virus in their blood, meaning they'd been exposed to it.
This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers.
Become an Insider and start reading now.
Most people contract EBV as kids, and never show serious symptoms of mono.
That same survey found that by ages six to eight, 55% of children already have the antibodies.
The virus actually stays in your body forever, but becomes inactive or latent, meaning it is present but not causing symptoms.
However, in some cases, research has found that people can still spread EBV long after the symptoms of mono have resided, or even when the symptoms haven't appeared at all.
Here's what you need to know about when mono is considered contagious and how it spreads.
Advertisement
How long is mono contagious?
Mono is characterized by a fever, sore throat, swollen lymph nodes and extreme fatigue that can last several weeks or even months.
However, it's contagious long before and after symptoms appear.
The incubation period of the virus, or the time between when you're infected with EBV and when the symptoms of mono begin to appear, is about four to six weeks.
You are typically contagious during the incubation period, so you could be walking around spreading the virus for a long time without even realizing it.
EBV takes hold in the immune cells in the oropharynx, or the mouth, so it is commonly spread through saliva.
This process is called oral shedding, and there has to be a high enough level of the virus in saliva to pass it to another human.
That means you won't get it just from being in the same room as someone with it, unless perhaps they sneeze directly on you.
Most commonly, EBV spreads through kissing, sharing food or drinks, or for young kids, sharing toys that have been drooled on.
Symptoms of mono generally last for a few weeks, and this is when you are the most contagious because you have higher levels of EBV in your saliva.
However, you can transmit EBV through oral shedding for much longer, even after your symptoms have left.
For example, a 2005 study published in the Journal of Infectious Diseases looked at 20 university students recently infected with EBV for the first time.
In 14 of the participants, EBV was detected in saliva even 32 weeks after infection, meaning they could still be spreading EBV despite no longer showing symptoms of mono.
You may also be able to spread EBV without ever showing symptoms of mono.
A 2016 study published in the journal Clinical & Translational Immunology followed 11 asymptomatic adults with EBV antibodies for six months, collecting 9 blood and oral cell samples.
They found 24% of the oral cell samples had EBV DNA, meaning they had infectious levels in their saliva.
Mia Mattioli, MD, an internal medicine physician at Huntington Hospital in California, says it is suspected that this type of shedding is part of a cycle responsible for the high exposure rate.
Adults with EBV antibodies asymptomatically shed, exposing their children, who then grow up, asymptomatically shed, and spread it to their young children.
Advertisement
How to reduce the risk of spreading mono
Because EBV is so widespread, and can be spread even by asymptomatic carriers, it's impractical to try to prevent it altogether, Mattioli says.
However, if you haven't had symptoms of mono and don't know if you have the EBV antibodies, there are ways to lower your risk of catching it from someone with symptoms of mono, such as:
Avoid sharing food or drinks
Practice good hand washing hygiene
No kissing or sexual activity
As for when these activities are safe to do again after someone has had the symptoms of mono, there is no clear cut answer.
"We typically say wait until the patient is asymptomatic, because we think that this correlates with the largest amount of viral shedding," Mattioli says.
But, of course, "There is still risk.
"
Advertisement
The bottom line
Mono is most contagious when someone is displaying symptoms.
But it can also be contagious before symptoms appear, in the first four to six weeks when someone is infected with EBV.
And it may also be contagious for several months after symptoms of mono reside — or even if they never show up.
Overall, if you know someone who has or recently had symptoms of mono, you should make sure you take precautions for several months to prevent any possible contagious spread through saliva.
Advertisement
Related articles from Health Reference:
The University of Manchester found that tinnitus could be a COVID-19 symptom – some patients of the virus are reporting a loss in hearing and ringing of the ears
Recently, individuals have been raising concerns about hearing loss as a side effect of the COVID vaccine.
There is no evidence in clinical trials or real-world data that this is a problem caused by taking the vaccine – but when it comes to COVID itself, a new story is emerging.
Professor Bin Cao, National Center for Respiratory Medicine and researcher on long COVID, explained: “Because COVID-19 is such a new disease, we are only beginning to understand some of its long-term effects on patients’ health.”
Now, scientists in Manchester are unearthing connections between patients of COVID and tinnitus.
A long-time tinnitus sufferer explained their experience as generally painless, but said that it “impairs your hearing” and can be “irritating when it happens”.
Tinnitus is medically described as a ringing in the ears, but it also can sound like roaring, clicking, hissing, or buzzing.
This can be loud or soft, high or low pitched and could impact both ears.
Viruses ‘can cause hearing loss’, says researcher
Kevin Munro, Professor of Audiology at The University of Manchester and Manchester BRC Hearing Health Lead, commented: “There is an urgent need for a carefully conducted clinical and diagnostic study to understand the long-term effects of COVID-19 on the auditory system.
“It is also well-known that viruses such as measles, mumps and meningitis can cause hearing loss; little is understood about the auditory effects of the SARS-CoV-2 virus.”
The NHS has included tinnitus in a list of long COVID symptoms, alongside problems with memory and depression.
‘The evidence base is growing’
Professor Kevin Munro and PhD researcher Ibrahim Almufarrij looked at 56 studies that linked COVID-19 to auditory problems, like loss of hearing and ringing in the ears.
They found that 7.6% of COVID patients experienced hearing loss, while 14.8% of them experienced tinnitus.
A further 7.2% experienced vertigo, a loss of balance which occurs in people with ear damage.
In a separate study, Professor Munro found that over 13% of patients who were discharged from a hospital reported a change in their hearing.
The team are conducting a long one-year study to further explore the link between COVID and ear damage.
Researcher Ibrahim Almufarrij explained: “Though the evidence is of varying quality, more and more studies are being carried out so the evidence base is growing.
What we really need are studies that compare COVID-19 cases with controls, such as patients admitted to hospital with other health conditions.
“Though caution needs to be taken, we hope this study will add to the weight of scientific evidence that there is a strong association between Covid-19 and hearing problems.”
Nearly eight months have gone by and we are only beginning to find out just how dangerous, and risky a brush with COVID-19 can be.
From post COVID symptoms, reinfection scare to some people having a higher risk of catching the disease, the pandemic has shown just how scary a virus can be.
There have been a lot of studies done so far to determine the link between pre-existing health conditions and the impact of COVID-19.
The one thing that has definitely been observed is that globally, men have a higher risk of developing severe COVID-19, and are more likely to die from it.
Long COVID patients in Colorado are still struggling as the world moves on: “We’re fighting for our lives”
Share on Pinterest Getty Images/pixdeluxe If you feel depressed when working, you’re not alone.
Sadness, anxiety, loss of motivation, difficulty concentrating, unexplained bouts of crying, and boredom are just a small sampling of the things you may be feeling if you’re experiencing depressive symptoms at work.
Depression impacts over 17 million American adults each year.
And data from the State of Mental Health in America 2021 survey shows that the number of people seeking help for depression increased significantly from 2019 to 2020.
There was a 62 percent increase in people who took the survey’s depression screen — and of those people, 8 in 10 tested positive for symptoms of moderate to severe depression.
When you consider that full-time employees spend an average of 8.5 hours per day working on weekdays and 5.5 hours working on weekends and holidays, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, it comes as no surprise that many of them will experience symptoms of depression while on the job.
Read on to find out why work might be triggering depressive symptoms, how to identify the signs, where to get help, and what you can do to start feeling better.
What is work depression?
While a job may not cause depression, the environment may worsen symptoms for people who already live with depression.
“Any workplace or job can be a potential cause or a contributing factor for depression depending on the level of stress and available support at the workplace,” said Rashmi Parmar, MD, a psychiatrist at Community Psychiatry.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), a negative working environment can lead to: mental and physical health concerns
absenteeism
lost productivity
increased substance use Mental Health America reports that depression ranks among the top three problems in the workplace for employee assistance professionals.
As with any other health condition, Parmar says, awareness and early detection are key.
“Depression is a complex condition with a varied manifestation of thoughts, feelings, and behavior that can affect anyone and everyone, and a variety of work and non-work-related factors might be at play when we consider someone struggling with workplace depression,” she explained.
What are the signs of work depression?
The signs of depression at work are similar to general depressive symptoms.
That said, some may look more specific to a workplace setting.
This depression will affect your level of functioning in your job as well as at home, Parmar said.
Some of the more common signs of work depression include: increased anxiety levels, especially when managing stressful situations or thinking about work when you’re away from your job
overall feelings of boredom and complacency about your job
low energy and lack of motivation to do things, which can sometimes manifest as boredom in tasks
persistent or prolonged feelings of sadness or low mood.
loss of interest in tasks at work, especially duties that you previously found interesting and fulfilling
feelings of hopelessness, helplessness, worthlessness, or overwhelming guilt
inability to concentrate or pay attention to work tasks and trouble retaining or remembering things, especially new information
making excessive errors in daily work tasks
an increase or decrease in weight or appetite
physical complaints like headaches, fatigue, and upset stomach
increased absences or coming late and leaving early
impaired decision-making capacity
irritability, increased anger, and poor frustration tolerance
crying spells or tearfulness at work, with or without any apparent triggers
trouble sleeping or sleeping too much (like taking naps during regular work hours)
self-medication with alcohol or substances If you’re good at masking or internalizing them, these signs of work depression might not be visible to your co-workers.
But there are some symptoms they may be more likely to notice.
According to Parmar, here are some common signs of work depression to be aware of: withdrawal or isolation from other people
poor self-hygiene or significant change in appearance
late arrival at work, missed meetings, or absent days
procrastination, missed deadlines, reduced productivity, subpar performance in tasks, increased errors, or difficulty making decisions
seeming indifference, forgetfulness, detachment, and disinterest in things
an appearance of tiredness for most or part of the day (may be taking afternoon naps at work)
irritability, anger, feeling overwhelmed, or getting very emotional during conversations (may start crying suddenly or become tearful over trivial things)
lack confidence while attempting tasks
Why you might be depressed at work There are various reasons why you may be dealing with an increase in depressive symptoms at work.
And while no two people — or experiences — are the same, some common themes seem to emerge when pinpointing the causes or triggers of signs of depression at work.
While not an exhaustive list, the following situations may contribute to work depression: feeling like you have no control over work issues
feeling like your job is in jeopardy
working in a toxic work environment
being overworked or underpaid
experiencing workplace harassment or discrimination
working irregular hours
lacking balance between work and home
working in a setting that doesn’t match your personal values
doing work that doesn’t further your career goals
experiencing poor or unsafe working conditions Work stress vs. work depression It’s not uncommon to experience stress at work, but don’t ignore feelings of depression.
It’s important to know the difference.
Work stress stress that decreases in intensity when the stressor passes
occasional bouts of feeling anxious and irritable
muscle tension or headaches Work depression increased feelings of sadness and crying
persistent feelings of anxiety
increased lack of focus and concentration
feeling bored and not fulfilled in your job Was this helpful?
Leela R. Magavi, MD, a psychiatrist and regional medical director at Community Psychiatry, said she works with many clients who are adversely affected by engaging in work they aren’t passionate about.
“Individuals can mindlessly complete tasks throughout the day and begin to feel disconnected and demoralized, which can exacerbate anxiety and depressive symptoms,” she explained.
Others may have little time to consume meals or hydrate throughout the day, which Magavi suggested could worsen fatigue and inattentiveness.
Does working remotely make you more likely to be depressed?
Working remotely, while convenient, comes with its pitfalls.
According to Parmar, the boundary between personal and professional life can easily disappear, causing major upheavals in your daily routine.
And creating and sticking to a structured routine at home is easier said than done.
“Without a routine, boredom can slowly creep in, giving way to depressive feelings and thoughts,” she said.
Without the social environment at work, Parmar said many people working from home experience feelings of loneliness and isolation.
“We’re forced to rely on chats or messages, phone calls, and video calls to connect with our friends and colleagues, which adds to our already increased screen time,” she said.
Remote work during COVID-19:
Tips for improving your mental health If working from home is your new “normal,” at least for now, you might be experiencing increased feelings of anxiety, stress, and depression.
Here are a few things you can do when those feelings surface: Get out of the house and take a walk.
Keep your workspace separate from other parts of the house.
Get rid of clutter around your desk.
Practice 5 minutes of mindfulness meditation in the morning, afternoon, and before you call it a day.
Call a non-work friend.
Step away from the screen throughout the day.
Was this helpful?
Adding to this, Parmar said many people might be working more hours than usual, since it can be hard to keep track of time while at home.
“It is very natural to get overwhelmed from all these factors and feel depressed or anxious,” she explained.
Magavi suggested prolonged remote work could create many emotional, physical, and financial hurdles for individuals.
“Low-income families are significantly disadvantaged due to limited resources or access to stable Wi-Fi, while other families, regardless of income, may be increasingly exposed to domestic violence due to displaced anger caused by the pandemic and associated stressors,” she said.
“Individuals may feel like there is nothing to look forward to, or they may struggle, as they no longer have an outlet to normalize their feelings of burnout with fellow employees,” she added.
What can you do if you feel depressed while working?
No matter where you work, managing symptoms at work can be challenging.
The good news is there are things you can do when you’re feeling depressed: Take a 10-minute break away from your desk or office.
Take a lunch break and get outdoors.
Go for a quick walk during a break — even if it’s indoors, exercise does wonders for mental health.
Take a mental health day.
Practice a few minutes of mindfulness meditation.
Incorporate deep breathing exercises into your day.
Say no to one small thing that allows you to experience less stress during the day.
Watch a funny video.
What are common risk factors for depression at work?
Some of the risk factors for depression at work, according to Magavi, include: dismissive managers
effort-reward imbalance
workplace politics
workplace gossip
workplace bullying
high job demands
low decision latitude
limited social support in the workplace Parmar pointed to additional risk factors like: unfair expectations
excessive workload
unclear or mismanaged roles at work She also suggested that a poor job fit can increase emotional and physical distress, leading to burnout, as can a poor emphasis on work-life balance.
Additionally, excessive long shifts of 10 to 12 hours or more or shifts during odd hours of the day that disrupt routines and sleep patterns are also risk factors.
A 2019 review found that shift workers, especially females, were at an increased risk for poor mental health — specifically symptoms of depression.
Photo: Getty Images
In the best of times, I’m an early-to-bed, early-to-rise person, and that much hasn’t changed.
Sleep is the only respite my brain gets from worrying about COVID-19, and, even then, not always: The other night, I dreamt I had congestion and a cough, and struggled to hide it from people I passed at the supermarket.
Many of us are currently experiencing nightmares, restless sleep and/or insomnia, and exhaustion that persists even after a decent night’s sleep.
Because “fatigue” is one possible coronavirus symptom and can precede more telltale signs like body aches and fever, I’ve worried that my tiredness means something, even as I know it’s very likely that it’s largely a result of stress: Along with fight and flight, fatigue is also one of the body’s evolutionarily adaptive responses to stress.
(There is also freeze and flooding of emotions — all Fs!)
For everyone else who is tired all the time now, and worried about what that means, I got in touch with Andrew Varga, a neuroscientist and physician at the Mount Sinai Integrative Sleep Center, and Curtis Reisinger, clinical psychologist and corporate director at Northwell Health, to learn more.
If I’m tired all the time, does that mean I could have coronavirus?
A report from late June, published in the journal PLOS One, compiled and analyzed data from 148 separate COVID-19 studies and revealed that fatigue was the third-most common symptom reported in laboratory-confirmed cases.
(Persistent cough was the first, and fever was the second.)
But, as is the case with chest tightness, or a cough, it’s hard for doctors to make a definitive diagnosis based on a single symptom.
And because fatigue can be a symptom of a number of things (many of them unrelated to your physical health), it’s not a reason to panic.
“If you get more symptoms, so it’s not just the fatigue, but fatigue plus body aches plus a cough and a fever, that’s worrisome,” says Varga.
“Chest tightness alone, fatigue alone — those are less concerning that you’re about to become really sick.”
So if I’m not sick, why am I tired every day?
Okay, yes: Many people likely have a pretty good guess as to an answer here.
Many essential workers are overworked and underpaid, often with fewer resources available when they do feel sick.
Parents are tired because they are often still parenting all day every day without the relief of school and/or child care.
But I work from home, on my couch, and I don’t have kids, so what’s my excuse?
First, says Reisinger, it’s important to understand there are different types of fatigue.
There’s physical fatigue, like you might experience after a long run or playing sports.
That kind can lead to achy muscles, but it’s usually pretty good for sleep.
There’s mental fatigue, like you might get after doing your taxes or something similarly … taxing.
Unless you’re an infectious-disease modeler, this probably isn’t the most likely culprit for your persistent exhaustion at the moment.
“When you get mental fatigue, you may jump up in the middle of the night and think of a solution,” says Reisinger, but otherwise, your sleep stays pretty regular.
What’s most troubling, says Reisinger, is the third form of fatigue: emotional.
When we’re on high emotional alert — worrying for ourselves, our families and friends, the world at large — we use up a lot of brain energy, and we tend to have a harder time recouping it.
“Emotional fatigue is the one that’s going to wake you up at three in the morning or give you insomnia — either you can’t get to sleep, or you wake up in the middle of the night and you can’t get back to sleep,” he says.
Without intending to, many of us play into our emotional fatigue through a process of “rehearsal,” says Varga.
“If you’re stressed about things during the day, there’s this tendency to kind of rehearse the things that are stressing you out right as you’re lying down in bed, and that kind of rehearsal can prevent you from falling asleep,” he says.
Getting into bed and mentally paging through every worst-case coronavirus graph you’ve ever seen?
Not such a good idea, apparently.
So how do I manage — or prevent — emotional fatigue?
Sleep is hugely important to our immune function, which makes it all the more frustrating when we can’t seem to get enough of it.
There are a number of tips Varga and Reisinger suggest for those struggling with emotional fatigue, and the resulting poor sleep quality, right now.
1.
Practice consistency: Get in bed at the same time every night, and get up at the same time every morning, as much as humanly possible.
2.
No screens for an hour before bedtime.
It’s hard, but avoiding your phone/laptop/iPad before bed benefits you in two ways: It gives you a break from the endless news cycle, and it gives your eyes a break from blue light, which Reisinger says promotes wakefulness: “Incandescent, red-spectrum lights are more like a sunset, and blue is more like a sunrise.”
Reading a book by lamplight: good.
Reading a book on your phone: not the best if your main goal is to sleep.
3.
Instead of phone time before bed, try relaxation techniques.
These can include deep-breathing exercises, progressive muscle relaxation, meditation, or taking a hot shower or bath.
4.
Avoid relying too heavily on alcohol.
While available evidence suggests we as a nation are not heeding this advice, Reisinger warns that using alcohol as a sleep aid (or a response to emotional fatigue) leads to a “rebound effect,” where sleep is disturbed once the alcohol is metabolized.
It’s also important, I think, to be understanding with ourselves for being tired or cranky or emotional as this crisis unfolds.
These events may be painful in ways we don’t even realize, says Reisinger.
“Some of the people who will be most affected by this are people with emotionally abusive histories and/or trauma in their past,” he says.
“Often, these types of things tap into the same sort of emotional areas of the brain, so they just can’t sleep, and they don’t know why.”
At the moment, some stress and emotional fatigue is unavoidable, but practicing consistency and limiting our news intake, especially before bed, are perhaps the best things we can do to keep it manageable.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the leading cause of death globally, accounting for an estimated 17.9 million lives each year and more than four out of five CVD deaths are due to heart attacks and strokes.
A heart attack is often referred to as a 'silent killer'.
This is because it does not show any symptoms and kills without a warning.
Many people who're at risk often are unaware that they even have the disease, which is what makes it so dangerous.
But while many believe heart attacks come with no signs, a recent study claims otherwise.
Also read: Pneumonia outbreak: 3 ways to stay safe
Zinc Can Lower Risk Of Common Cold And Flu, Shorten Duration Of Symptoms
You're more likely to catch common cold and flu in colder months.
Zinc products like nasal spray, nasal gel, lozenge, oral zinc are widely available, affordable, and generally safe, according to researchers.
Common cold and flu are more common in winter months.
What can you do to reduce the risk of contracting these viral infections?
Increasing your zinc intake may help, suggested a new study published in BMJ Open.
The study led by Jennifer Hunter, Associate Professor at Western Sydney University's NICM Health Research Institute, concluded that Zinc can prevent symptoms and shorten the duration of community-acquired acute viral respiratory tract infections, such as the common cold and flu-like illnesses.
Common causes of upper respiratory tract infections include respiratory viruses include rhinovirus, adenovirus, parainfluenza virus, and influenza virus.
Because we spend indoors more often during winters, it becomes easier for viruses to pass from one person to another.
This is one reason why respiratory illnesses are more common in colder months.
In addition, experts say the cold, dry air may weaken out body's resistance against these germs.
The protective effects of zinc
In the new study, the researchers analysed 28 randomised controlled trials that had more than 5,000 adult participants of all age groups.
Results showed that zinc lowered risk of contracting symptoms consistent with the common cold (28 per cent) and contracting a flu-like illness (68 per cent).
Additionally, they found that zinc shortened the duration of symptoms by around two days as well as reduced symptomatic severity around the peak of illness.
However, the reduction in overall symptom severity were insignificant, and the protective effects of zinc were very less when participants were purposely infected with human rhinovirus.
Zinc's role in preventing and treating infections is commonly considered only for people who are zinc deficient, but the new study challenges this notion, Hunter said.
You may like to read
However, she cautioned that the results may not apply to Covid-19.
Side effects of zinc products
The study found an increased risk of non-serious adverse events related to zinc intake such as nausea or mouth and nasal irritation in some participants, but the very low risk of serious adverse events (such as copper deficiency from oral zinc and loss of smell from zinc nasal sprays and gels).
While there's limited research on whether zinc nasal spray or nasal gel or lozenge or oral zinc is any better or worse than the others, Hunter said zinc products are generally safe.
Zinc gluconate or zinc acetate formulations are mostly used in clinical trials.
Common Cold And Flu: Know The Difference
Both cold and flu are respiratory infections caused by viruses.
The symptoms you're having can tell if you have cold and flu.
For example, if you have symptoms like runny or stuffy nose, sore throat, sneezing, cough, headache or body aches, mild tiredness, then you have probably contracted a cold.
If you have flu symptoms, you may also experience moderate to high fever, shaking chills, severe muscle or body aches, severe fatigue lasting up to two weeks, nausea and vomiting, as well as diarrhea.
Colds are often milder than the flu, and usually get better in 7 to 10 days.
Compared to colds, flu symptoms come on more quickly and usually last 1 to 2 weeks.
With inputs from agencies
Prostatic artery embolization (PAE) is safe and effective for treating benign prostatic hyperplasia, but it is associated with inferior 2-year patient-reported and functional outcomes compared with transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP), according to a recent study.
In a single-center randomized trial that included 103 patients with refractory lower urinary tract symptoms secondary to benign prostatic obstruction, PAE resulted in significantly less improvement in maximum urinary flow rate (Qmax) and less reduction in post-void residual (PVR) urine and prostate volume compared with TURP, Dominik Abt, MD, of the University of St. Gallen in St. Gallen, Switzerland, and colleagues reported in European Urology.
“Improvements of subjective and objective outcomes are superior after TURP, and PAE does not represent a definitive treatment for a relevant proportion of patients,” the authors concluded.
“This should be considered for patient selection and counselling.”
At 24 months after treatment, the mean reduction in International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) was significantly lower in the PAE than TURP group (9.21 vs 12.09).
The mean improvement in Qmax was 3.9 mL/s in the PAE arm compared with 10.23 mL/s in the TURP group.
The mean reduction in PVR was significantly less in the PAE than TURP arm (62.1 vs 204 mL).
The PAE group experienced a significantly less pronounced mean reduction in prostate volume, as measured by magnetic resonance imaging, compared with the TURP patients (10.66 vs. 30.20 mL).
PAE represents an option for men seeking minimally invasive therapies and who will accept outcomes inferior to those of more invasive surgical treatments, according to the investigators.
Reference
Abt D, Müllhaupt G, Hechelhammer L, et al.
Prostatic artery embolization versus transurethral resection of the prostate for benign prostatic hyperplasia: 2-yr outcomes of a randomised, open-label, single-centre trial.
Published online February 18, 2021.
Eur Urol.
doi:10.1016/j.eururo.2021.02.008
0 Shares
The following is a satire for the Opinions section.
“If it looks like chicken, feels like chicken but does not taste or smell like chicken… is it still chicken?”
A lone DU student sits among his friends, quietly prodding the oven-roasted, rosemary rubbed perfectly shaped chicken breast on his plate with disinterest.
It is a lasting reminder of the 14 days he spent in isolation with just a runny nose.
Anosmia is defined by Merriam-Webster as the “loss or impairment of the sense of smell” and has impacted millions of people recovering from COVID-19 over the globe.
For some, this side effect has been a slight irritation whereas for others it is the worst punishment, forcing the foodiest foodies to push back their plates in dismay.
This loss of smell might seem all bad but there is one winner: restaurants.
With so many anosmia-ridden customers, they no longer have to buy spices.
An anonymous spokesperson from Illegal Pete’s, a Colorado-based “mission style” burrito eatery, shared that they too have begun eliminating spice from their food.
Chile powder, cumin, Mexican oregano and garlic powder are now a thing of the past.
They have begun teaching their workers how to mime table salt and mixing in other spices instead of actually adding them — nobody seems to notice.
For some reason, this spice elimination has not impacted the DU dining hall.
Freshman biology major, Nema Alfsifide, says that while she is “concerned about the culinary quality” in the general Denver metropolitan area as “spices are an integral part of the art of cooking and without them food turns into solely fuel”.
She did say however, that she’s “really grateful for the flavorful and well made food in the DU dining hall.”
The new DU dining hall which opened this past January houses 8 separate food stations: Stir Fry, 7 Spoons (food from around the world), Grill, Greens, Vegetarian/Vegan, Pure & Simple (food without the most common allergens), Pizza and Pasta.
Together these stations make a tasty and enjoyable dining experience.
Alfsifide noted that one of the reasons she picked DU was for the food and convivial energy during meals which have been wonderful in comparison to the spiceless and moodless meals off-campus.
Though Alfsifide still has all her taste buds intact, she acknowledged that many people do not, so she shared two recipes, enclosed below, for people suffering from anosmia.
Happy eating!
Butternut (and ONLY Butternut) Squash Soup
Heat oil in a large pot over medium heat.
Add squash and cook until it begins to soften, stirring occasionally, for 8-10 minutes.
Add 3 cups of broth.
Bring to a boil, cover, and reduce heat to a simmer.
Cook until squash is tender.
Let cool slightly then pour the soup into a blender, working in batches if necessary, and blend until smooth.
If too thick, add up to 1 more cup of broth and blend.
Season with nothing as it will be a waste of money.
“It looks like Pesto” Pesto Pasta
Pull out a green food coloring tube.
Cook your pasta in a large pot of unsalted boiling water according to the package directions.
Before draining the pasta, reserve some of the starchy pasta water.
Then, add ¼ cup of this pasta water back into the pot with your green food coloring.
Stir until even.
Toss the cooked pasta and spinach mush until the green food coloring fully coats it.
Finish everything off with some toasted pine nuts just for the crunch.
No lemon, salt, pepper or red pepper flakes are necessary.
December 30, 2022
Adults with severe ADHD symptoms were more likely to be expelled and receive reprimands from teachers as school children compared to adults with less severe or no ADHD symptoms, according to a partial study published this month in
the Journal of Attention Disorders.1
Researchers compared the school experiences and intensity of ADHD symptoms in 1,518 adults from the Czech Republic aged 18 to 65.
Participants answered questions from the Adult ADHD Self-Report Scale (ASRS) and were grouped according to symptom manifestation, or “ADHD type”: low, medium, and high.
Findings revealed that those with higher ADHD symptoms were “significantly more likely to be expelled, receive notes for bad behavior, disturbing or forgetting, as well as receive reprimands from teachers” as children.
“The results suggest that children with higher ADHD symptomatology are more likely to be forgetful, restless, and misbehave — which then gets written down by their teachers,” researchers said.
“The school difficulties were found regardless of age, and students with increased ADHD symptomatology struggled in elementary and lower high school.”
Behavior grades were not significantly different between groups.
“School behavioral problems can have long-term negative consequences on educational and working careers,” researchers said.
“Even in places where behavior is not graded, such as in the U.S. school systems, an ADHD diagnosis is associated with a significantly lower grade point average.”
Researchers recommend “early ADHD screening and improved education of teachers and school workers about the association between ADHD and possible school problems.”
They also noted the importance of screening for comorbid conditions like anxiety, which can also influence school performance or even be misdiagnosed as ADHD.
“Such raised awareness can positively affect teachers’ approach and, subsequently, their way of evaluating children,” they said.
Sources
1 Vňuková, M., Děchtěrenko, F., Weissenberger, S., Anders, M., & Ptáček, R. (2022).
Childhood School Performance in Adults Diagnosed with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.
Journal of Attention Disorders, 0(0).
https://doi.org/10.1177/10870547221140601
Neurological effects of post-acute sequelae SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC)—or long COVID—poses a conundrum for physicians.
How it manifests is unclear and finding effective treatments may be an exercise of trial and error.
Half the dues, all the AMA benefits!
AMA membership offers unique access to savings and resources tailored to enrich the personal and professional lives of physicians, residents and medical students.
Learn More
Symptoms may never go completely away, but studies suggest that a patient’s health should improve over time, noted John Vasudevan, MD, associate professor of clinical physical medicine and rehabilitation at Penn Medicine in Philadelphia.
Dr. Vasudevan spoke on neurological sequelae in long COVID during an education session at the 2022 AMA Interim Meeting in Honolulu.
“We don't have all the answers, but the more you consider the emerging evidence, the more we can help our patients,” Dr. Vasudevan said.
There are varying symptoms and risk There are varying symptoms and risk
Origins of neurological symptoms may occur when the virus finds its way to the ACE2 receptor, inhibiting mitochondrial function and nitric oxide synthesis.
“These receptors are less dense in neural tissues, so a majority of neurologic injury may be a consequence of damage to other systems,” such as the cardiovascular system, said Dr. Vasudevan, adding that some experts posit that viral fragments could potentially linger within the neuron like a herpes infection, causing dysfunction to the neuron.
Fatigue, headache, and brain fog are the most common neurologic symptoms of long COVID.
In fact, according to a study from the University of California, San Diego (UCSD), at six months, 68.8% of patients experienced memory impairment.
Meanwhile, 61.5% experienced decreased concentration.
“There can also be persistent loss of taste and smell lasting well after the infection,” said Dr. Vasudevan.
Skin biopsies may be considered to identify autonomic dysfunction or signs of small fiber neuropathy.
Risk factors include age, comorbidities, hypertension, nonwhite race, preexisting neurologic disorders, female sex, and severity of the initial infection.
Related Coverage What doctors wish patients knew about long COVID-19 brain fog
Treatment should target symptoms Treatment should target symptoms
At baseline, physicians should exclude other potential causes for symptoms that would cause fatigue, or some other easily measurable and correctable problem.
Treatment is often targeted toward the patient’s symptoms.
“We're physicians, so we understand how to appropriately use medications on a trial and error basis,” monitoring regularly for regression.
Treatment should be focused simultaneously on physical and psychological aspects of the disease, Dr. Vasudevan said, emphasizing that “you're missing half the picture if you're not talking about both.”
Forty percent of patients will screen positive for anxiety or depression, which may be a chicken-egg situation—whether this is a direct effect of the syndrome or people are just frustrated with how it's interfering with their life.
“You must address it.
Don't forget to incorporate neuropsychology, speech, and language pathology,” he said.
Patients wanting to return to sports or fitness should be treated in a similar manner to those with post-concussive syndrome.
Vaccination may reduce PASC incidence Vaccination may reduce PASC incidence
Physicians will likely have to try several medications until something works, said Dr. Vasudevan.
But “just like anything, start low, and go slow.
Don't forget non-pharmacologic treatment such as compression garments for patients with dysautonomia, or olfactory training for those with loss of smell.”
Experimental trials are taking place on low dose naltrexone, “but there's not enough to conclude anything on that right now,” said Dr. Vasudevan.
He also noted that vaccinations don’t prevent you from getting COVID, but there is evidence suggesting it may reduce PASC incidence by 8.8% and prevalence at three months by 12.8%.
Related Coverage
For patients with long COVID, look out for psychiatric sequelae
A call for more robust studies A call for more robust studies
It is important for physicians to try to ease their patients’ suffering the best they can, Dr. Vasudevan said.
“You have to be honest with your patients while working through it with them.”
UCSD researchers determined that 80% of patients with long COVID reported only mild to moderate initial disease, with only 9% being hospitalized.
However, many sufferers experienced improvement by six months from symptoms onset.
Based on these findings, physicians may counsel such patients to reassess for changes by the six-month mark, said Dr. Vasudevan.
“We need to establish many more multidisciplinary, multi-centered consensus on the diagnostic criteria for this neurologic component,” he said, noting “a lot of the data is just emerging and requires constant vigilance and collaboration.”
For some people with allergies, symptoms like sneezing, sinus congestion, and watery eyes can also come with a headache.
Many people who experience head pain with their allergies wrongly assume it’s just another symptom of allergies, or a sinus headache, according to Lauren Doyle Strauss, DO, a headache specialist and an assistant professor at Wake Forest Baptist Health in Winston Salem, North Carolina.
“I see people with allergies who think they have sinus headaches when in reality, many of them meet the criteria for migraine,” says Dr. Strauss.
If you’re living with both conditions, the one-two punch of allergies and migraine can keep you indoors (often in a dark room) and away from friends and activities for weeks or even months, depending on the season.
Find out how allergies may be triggering or worsening migraine and what the experts advise about seeking diagnosis and treatment.
RELATED:
Is It a Migraine Attack or a Sinus Headache?
People With Migraine Are More Likely to Have Allergies
Migraine and allergies are both very common conditions, and it’s not at all unusual for people to have both, according to Katherine Hamilton, MD, an assistant professor of clinical neurology and a headache specialist at Penn Medicine in Philadelphia.
“It’s also been shown in studies that people with migraine are more likely to have allergies, and people with allergies are more likely to have migraine, though we don't understand exactly why that link exists.
It may potentially be related to genetic factors,” says Dr. Hamilton.
A study published in the Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences found that migraine frequency in people with allergic rhinitis was four times higher than in those without allergic rhinitis.
Of those with migraine, 95 percent experienced migraine without aura and 5 percent had migraine with aura.
Persistent Headache More Typical of Migraine Than Allergies
Trying to determine what is headache due to migraine versus what is a headache due to allergies is a common issue, says Hamilton.
“We know that a lot of people can have a misdiagnosis of sinus headaches or headaches from allergies, when in fact their headaches are from migraine.”
Hamilton points to a study published in JAMA Internal Medicine that found that 88 percent of people with a history of sinus headaches actually had a migraine-type headache.
“A large percentage of people were misdiagnosed,” she says.
“The fact is, headache is not a very common symptom, in and of itself, of seasonal allergies or allergic rhinitis.
It’s much more common to have symptoms such as nasal congestion, like a stuffy nose or runny nose, and eye watering,” says Hamilton.
If you do have a headache that persists, it might not be just allergies, she says.
“That might be an indication that there's also migraine going on.
Typically, headache can be due a sinus infection or viral or bacterial infection, but it's rare to have a significant headache from just allergy symptoms,” says Hamilton.
Migraine and ‘Sinus Headache’ Have Overlapping Symptoms
Part of the reason for confusion is because oftentimes, migraine-related headaches mimic what people typically think of as sinus headaches, she explains.
“You can have pain over the sinuses and over the face with both types of headache.
With migraine, there can also be symptoms that are similar to allergy symptoms, like a stuffy or runny nose and eye tearing, and that overlap can be why patients are misdiagnosed,” says Hamilton.
However, there are some key symptoms of migraine that you won’t find in other types of headaches, which can include nausea, vomiting, light sensitivity, and sound sensitivity, according to the American Migraine Foundation.
Some people with migraine have a visual aura that includes bright spots, lights, or colors prior to the onset of an attack, which wouldn’t happen in a tension-type or sinus headache.
RELATED: 11 Answers to Your Questions About Light Sensitivity and Eye Pain in Migraine
Allergies Could Trigger Migraine Attack in a Few Different Ways
It makes sense that allergies could trigger an attack in people who are predisposed to migraine, says Hamilton.
“If you're having a lot of allergic symptoms, and you're having a lot of inflammation in the body, that could make you more prone to migraine attacks in general,” she says.
Some experts believe that the histamine release that happens during allergic reactions can potentially also play a role in migraine, she says.
“There are potential mechanisms that could explain an increased propensity for migraine when you're having seasonal allergies,” says Hamilton.
Histamine is a chemical found in some cells that can be released when a person is allergic to something, and it causes many of the symptoms of allergies.
Histamine release may be involved in triggering a headache, specifically migraine, according an article published in March 2019 in The Journal of Headache and Pain.
Allergies may indirectly contribute to migraine by disrupting sleep, says Strauss.
“If you’re very uncomfortable from all this congestion and postnasal drip, that could even be a trigger for headache,” she says.
RELATED:
Sleep Tips for People With Migraine
Even if You Have Allergies, Frequent Headaches May Indicate Migraine
Hamilton suggests talking with your primary care doctor if you’re having frequent headaches with allergy symptoms.
“That might mean that your allergies are actually triggering migraines or contributing,” she says.
In that situation it might be useful to try migraine medications — both as-needed, or abortive, medications and potentially preventive medications, she adds.
“If it is a migraine, treating the attack with decongestants, antihistamines, and other allergy medicines typically won’t be as effective as a targeted migraine treatment,” says Strauss.
“A good rule of thumb is that if you’re not getting complete relief of your headaches from over-the-counter medications, or if the headaches are becoming more frequent or frequent enough that you're having to take an over-the-counter medication several times a week, you should definitely seek a doctor’s care,” says Hamilton.
Treating Allergies Could Help With Migraine
There are certainly scenarios where treating allergies may help headaches, says Strauss.
“But what we want to avoid is spending years cycling through tons of allergy medicines if someone is having severe headaches.
There are other medications we’d want to try,” she says.
“If you have migraine attacks that seem to really be triggered by certain changes in the environment — for example, higher pollen — or if there is really a lot of nasal congestion or runny nose, then I think it may be worth exploring the role of allergies,” says Hamilton.
Strauss suggests keeping a yearly calendar year to see if there are certain months or seasons when migraine attacks become a problem.
“
This can tip you off if it’s related to something in the environment, and you could talk with your doctor.
It may help to take preventive migraine medications or allergy medicine during those months,” she says.
OTC Medications for Allergies and Migraine Come With Potential Risks
If the symptoms of allergies and migraine are fairly mild, they could both be treated with just over-the-counter medications, says Hamilton.
“I would caution people who are self-treating who think their headaches are from allergies.
They may take a lot of allergy medication, and certain ones like Sudafed (pseudoephedrine) can potentially cause a worsening headache if you take it frequently,” she says.
Pain relivers such as aspirin, acetaminophen, NSAIDS, decongestants, and combination medicines that contain caffeine, aspirin, and acetaminophen or butalbital can all contribute to medication overuse headache (MOH), according to the American Migraine Foundation.
MOH is defined as a headache occurring on 15 or more days per month in a person with a preexisting primary headache and developing as a consequence of regular overuse of acute or symptomatic headache medication, according to the International Headache Society.
RELATED: 10 Things You Need to Know About Medication-Overuse Headache
You May Need Specialists to Treat Your Migraine and Allergies
It’s important to be aware that migraine and allergies are commonly present in the same person and both issues need to be addressed, says Hamilton.
“It might take potentially seeing different doctors — both an allergist and a neurologist — and trying different medications for both conditions.
In some cases, you may not get complete relief until you address both issues,” she says.
Amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, a new virus is wreaking havoc in people's lives.
We are talking about norovirus here.
So far, 154 cases of norovirus have been reported in England.
The virus causes an infection which can lead to severe diarrhoea and vomiting.
It can spread from one person to another and from contaminated surfaces as well.
The cases in Britain have increased 3 times in the past 5 days, which makes it a matter of concern.
Till now no alarms have been raised by the Indian authorities.
But it's best to know what exactly is norovirus and how is it different from the COVID-19 infection.
Since there are many common symptoms, one can easily get confused between norovirus and COVID infection.
NEEDING to pee during the night could be a sign of prostate cancer, experts warn.
Nocturia, as it's known, is one of the most common symptoms of the disease, which kills more than 12,000 men in the UK every year.
1 More than 12,000 men die from prostate cancer every year in the UK Credit: Getty
Prostate cancer is the most common type in men, and more than 52,000 men are diagnosed every year in the UK – but three-quarters survive ten years or more.
It's very treatable if caught early and medics are now urging Brits to be aware of the signs to stop the illness.
In most cases, the illness has no symptoms until the growth is big enough to put pressure on the urethra – that tube you pee through.
This can leave men feeling the urge to pee in the night.
According to the NHS, other indicators can include:
Needing to rush to the toilet
Difficulty in starting to pee (hesitancy)
Straining or taking a long time while peeing
Weak flow
Dribbling urine after you finish urinating
Feeling that your bladder has not emptied fully
Blood in urine or blood in semen
Many men’s prostates get larger as they age because of the non-cancerous conditions, prostate enlargement, and benign prostatic hyperplasia.
These two conditions are more common than prostate cancer – but that doesn’t mean the symptoms should be ignored.
The signs that cancer has spread include bone, back, or testicular pain, loss of appetite, and unexplained weight loss.
You might also have specific symptoms depending on where the cancer has spread to.
According to Cancer Research UK, this most common place is to the bones, followed by the lymph nodes, liver and lungs.
More than 52,000 men are diagnosed with prostate cancer every year across the UK - that's 143 every day.
Someone dies from the disease every 45 minutes, according to the charity Prostate Cancer UK.
It mainly affects men over 50, and your risk increases with age.
This becomes even higher for black men and those with a family history of prostate cancer.
If you suspect you might have prostate cancer, speak to your GP.
You can check your prostate cancer risk with this online tool.
There are several tests available, including a digital rectal examination, a PSA blood test, a biopsy and scans.
Treatment usually involves active surveillance, surgery or radiotherapy.
Generally, more than 95 per cent of people survive a year following diagnosis, and 85 per cent survive their cancer for five years or more.
Your outlook depends on when it was caught.
The earlier the better.
FAQs
(You can now subscribe to our
(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel
According to a new book, the Queen Elizabeth II covertly battled a particularly terrible kind of cancer in the final years of her life.
A future biography of Her Majesty authored by a close friend of Prince Philip stated that the Queen had bone marrow cancer, with bone pain being the most prevalent symptom.
The remarks concerning her health problems were made in Gyles Brandreth's planned book, Elizabeth: An Intimate Portrait.
The Queen's death certificate, issued in September, said she died of old age.
Mr Brandreth wrote in the biography, which is being serialised in the Daily Mail that he had heard the Queen had a form of myeloma, a bone marrow cancer, which would explain her tiredness and weight loss, as well as the mobility issues' we were frequently told about during her final year or so of life.
Myeloma's most prevalent symptom is bone pain, particularly in the pelvis and lower back, and multiple myeloma is a disease that primarily affects the elderly.
He noted that there is presently no known cure, but therapy, such as medications to control the immune system and pharmaceuticals to help prevent bone weakness, can lower the severity of the symptoms and extend the patient's survival by months or two to three years.
Queen Elizabeth II was married to Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh.
As so, he was the British monarch's consort from Elizabeth's coronation on 6 February 1952 until he died in 2021, making him the longest-serving royal consort in history.
Prince Philip did not hold the title of the king since, according to British royal custom, a man who marries into the royal family does not inherit the male form of his wife's title.
A nytime you're feeling under the weather, it's paramount that you have your go-to relaxation remedies at the ready.
Whether it's Ginger Ale (sipped through a bendy straw, obviously), cueing up "The Price Is Right" on TV, or closing your eyes under a cold compress, taking these small-but-soothing steps can be an important part of healing when done in tandem with medical care.
Staying hydrated, well-fed, and getting plenty of rest are all common "home remedies," but if you want one more comforting component to incorporate into your sick day arsenal, know that there are quite a few nytime you're feeling under the weather, it's paramount that you have your go-to relaxation remedies at the ready.
Whether it's Ginger Ale (sipped through a bendy straw, obviously), cueing up "The Price Is Right" on TV, or closing your eyes under a cold compress, taking these small-but-soothing steps can be an important part of healing when done in tandem with medical care.
Staying hydrated, well-fed, and getting plenty of rest are all common "home remedies," but if you want one more comforting component to incorporate into your sick day arsenal, know that there are quite a few teas that can help soothe some of the symptoms you may be facing.
Experts In This Article Mahmud Kara, MD, functional medicine doctor and founder of supplement company KaraMD
Shawn Nasseri, MD, Harvard Medical School- and Mayo Clinic-trained ear, nose, and throat specialist
Utilizing tea to treat illness is not a new wellness protocol—it's actually quite ancient, according to the text Herbal Medicine: Biomolecular and Clinical Aspects.
Research has shown that the second emperor of China, Shen Nung (2737 BCE), is one of the earliest recorded instances of drinking tea.
Various teas have been used for treating myriad symptoms in the centuries since then.
Nowadays, while there are plenty of physicians and pharmacies that can offer the science-backed treatment protocol and medicine you'll need to help get you back on your feet, bolstering your healing process with other soothing care strategies can still be beneficial.
If you are curious about a two-birds-one-stone tactic of sipping comforting teas that also have health benefits to offer, here are some teas that can help soothe a wide array of symptoms.
Related Stories
Which tea to sip based on the symptoms you're facing, according to physicians
1.
Indigestion/Nausea: Peppermint or ginger tea
An upset stomach is a total vibe kill, but there are a handful of teas that can help soothe your discomfort.
"Peppermint tea has 'dyspeptic' benefits, meaning that it can offer relief from nausea, indigestion, and heartburn," says functional medicine physician Mahmud Kara, MD, former Cleveland Clinic physician and founder of KaraMD.
Try this caffeine-free peppermint tea.
Because of its potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, Dr. Kara also says that ginger tea can help relieve muscle pain and aches, and it has also been associated with reduced nausea and vomiting.
(You knew the whole Ginger-Ale-for-belly-aches thing had to come from somewhere, right?)
Shop our pick for a delicious ginger tea.
2.
Sore throat: Licorice root, echinacea, mint, or chamomile tea
Sore throats can be the result of either a bacterial infection, a viral infection, or irritation from nasal mucus draining out of the "back" of the nose and down the throat, according to Shawn Nasseri, MD, a Mayo Clinic trained ENT.
As a result, he says that tea can be a great tool to combat this discomfort because of its close contact with the throat.
As always, it's crucial to have a provider inspect your problem areas and symptoms, especially if it's too painful to swallow.
However, if you're aware of what's causing the sore throat and just want some relief, Dr. Nasseri recommends licorice root, echinacea, mint, or chamomile tea to soothe your pain.
"These teas offer pain-relieving, moisture-adding, and anti-inflammatory relief for a scratchy raw throat," he says.
This variety pack lets you try a few and find the most soothing one for your symptoms.
3. Stuffy nose and congestion: Mint tea
Mint tea, according to Dr. Kara, is one of the most used teas during common colds and cases of flu.
"The soothing sensation of minty aromas, such as menthol, is almost universal," he says.
According to a 2003 review from the National Library of Medicine, menthol has been utilized in traditional herbal medicine for hundreds of years and was adopted by western pharmacology in the 19th century.
I
f you've ever wondered why mintiness (and things like Icy Hot) feel cold to the touch, it's because our nervous system has certain receptors that associate the scent of menthol oil with this sensation.
This, according to Dr. Nasseri, is precisely why peppermint and spearmint tea are common recommendations for helping treat a stuffy nose and general congestion.
This mint tea is an excelled choice for a simple yet effective flavor profile.
On that note, if you're on the hunt for another herbal tea that can help boost immunity, you may want to check out thyme tea benefits (and brew a cup).
4.
Insomnia or restlessness: Chamomile tea
There's a reason that some tea companies typically brand chamomile tea as "sleepy time" tea.
According to a 2008 article published in Molecular Medicine Reports, chamomile tea has been used for hundreds of years for its slight sedative effect on people.
"In Western herbalism, traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), and Ayurveda, chamomile is mainly known for its wonderful relaxation effects," herbalist and Urban Remedy founder Neka Pasquale, LAc, MS, previously told Well+Good.
"In TCM, chamomile is mainly used to move the qi and treat stagnation, or stuck energy.
It's used in support of the lungs (colds and flu), heart (nervous disorders), and stomach (digestion).
In Ayurveda, chamomile is used for gas, bloating, painful menses, insomnia, and to calm the nervous system."
Want a similar tasting option that's also caffeine-free, butterfly pea flower tea is a great option, too.
5.
Headaches: Turmeric-infused ginger tea
Headaches are common and complicated, as numerous different factors can cause them.
Many headaches can (of course) not be helped by tea, but if your pain is due to inflammation, sinus pressure, or plain old dehydration, Dr. Kara recommends the best tea for headaches is turmeric-infused ginger tea, as it can have hydrating and anti-inflammatory effects on the body, which could help a headache if those are the sources of the pain.
6.
Lethargy and brain fogginess: Green tea
Green tea has energy-boosting features like caffeine and an anti-inflammatory plant compound known as epigallocatechin-3-gallate (aka EGCG).
Additionally, Dr. Kara says that green tea also has an amino acid known as L-theanine, which has been found to have calming, stress-soothing effects on the body.
"This combo can support a headache and general lethargy or fogginess that may be a result of your illness," he says.
If you want a green tea you can pop in the fridge during warmer months, try this one.
Bottom line?
Just the act of cozying up with a hot cup of tea has relaxation-boosting benefits—but the fact that there are tea options out there that taste great and can help you manage your symptoms is a nice bonus to tea's naturally comforting effects.
Just keep in mind that the above remedies are *added* recommendations to any treatment plan, including potential medications, that a professional health provider recommends.
WHEN you think of skin cancer, scary-looking moles probably spring to mind.
But there are other, more subtle symptoms that are much easier to brush off, experts warn.
1 Getting out of breath doing day-to-day tasks, like vacuuming, could be a sign of melanoma Credit: Getty
For example, getting out of breath doing day-to-day tasks, such as vacuuming, is considered to be a symptom of melanoma.
This is the most serious type of skin cancer, and is diagnosed 17,500 times a year.
The deadly disease claims the lives of 2,340 people annually, according to Cancer Research UK (CRUK).
It develops on skin that has been exposed to too much sun.
Survival rates are very high, with 87 per cent of patients living at least 10 years after their diagnosis.
But if left untreated, the cancer can spread to other parts of the body, such as the liver, brain, lungs and bones.
Once it reaches the lungs, it can trigger breathlessness, according to cancer charity Macmillan.
Like with any cancer, survival rates are best when the illness is detected fast when it is only affecting the skin.
That's why it's worth knowing eight other easy-to-miss signs of skin cancer.
The most common sign of melanoma is the appearance of a new mole or a change in an existing mole, such as a:
Mole with a mix of colours Large mole Mole that changes over time Swollen mole Bleeding mole Itchy mole Crusty mole Mole in the shape of a line under a nail
In women in the UK, the most common location for melanoma skin cancers is the legs.
Men are more likely to see melanomas in their trunk - the back or torso.
CRUK said rates have tripled in the over-55s since the 1990s, partly because of a fashion for cheap package holidays and tanning that dates back to the 60s.
There are also more people coming forward and getting their skin checked, it added.
Mario Arango via Getty Images
If you often find yourself feeling dizzy, fatigued and experiencing headaches, the issue could actually lie in your bloodstream.
These symptoms, when combined, could be an indicator of thrombocytopenia – also known as a low blood platelet count – according to the Heart Cells Foundation.
Advertisement
Platelets play a vital role in our daily wellbeing as well as clot formation, but a low platelet count could lead to reduced energy levels and could also be a sign of an underlying condition.
While a normal platelet count ranges from 150,000 to 450,000 per microlitre of blood, a count lower than 150,000 is considered thrombocytopenia, according to OneBlood.
Thrombocytopenia might occur as a result of a bone marrow disorder such as leukaemia or an immune system problem, suggests Mayo Clinic.
Or it can occur as a result of taking certain medications.
It can affect both children and adults.
Signs of a low blood platelet count
As well as fatigue, dizziness and headaches, some of the signs of thrombocytopenia can include:
Easy or excessive bruising (purpura)
Superficial bleeding into the skin that appears as a rash of pinpoint-sized reddish-purple spots (petechiae), usually on the lower legs
Prolonged bleeding from cuts
Bleeding from your gums or nose
Blood in urine or stools
Unusually heavy menstrual flows
Enlarged spleen.
If your doctor suspects you may have a low platelet count, they’ll recommend the best treatment plan for you.
This could be as simple as small lifestyle changes (like cutting down on the amount of alcohol you drink) or you may be prescribed steroids or other medications to help boost your platelet production.
If medicines don’t work, you may be offered a blood or platelet transfusion, or surgery to remove your spleen (if that is found to be the cause of the issue).
Causes of low platelet count
According to Heathline, there are a range of potential causes of low platelet count including:
Aplastic anaemia
Vitamin deficiencies such as B12, folate, and iron
Viral infections including HIV, Epstein-Barr, mumps, rubella, and chickenpox
Exposure to chemotherapy, radiation or toxic chemicals
Consuming too much alcohol
Cirrhosis
Certain types of cancers such as leukaemia and lymphoma
Myelodysplasia
Genetic conditions such as May-Hegglin and Wiskott-Aldrich syndromes
Some pregnant women develop mild thrombocytopenia when they are close to delivery.
If you think you may be experiencing symptoms of a low platelet count, it’s essential you speak to a healthcare professional, especially if your symptoms are serious, including wounds or cuts that won’t stop bleeding or blood in your stools or urine.
If you are at risk of developing this condition due to a medical condition or family history, it’s essential you get regular checks, too.
Advertisement
2023 alcoholic beverages outlook: Slow sales a symptom of weaker economy
Jun 20, 2023 7 min read
Alcohol beverage manufacturing is a low-margin, high-volume business.
Major shifts in demand or production costs have had significant financial implications over the last few years.
Canadian alcoholic beverage manufacturers derive 88% of their revenue domestically, and consumer spending on alcohol has been volatile in the last three years.
Canadians spent more on alcohol during the pandemic than the historical trend, despite the intermittent opportunities to purchase higher-priced alcohol in dining establishments during that period.
That reversed in 2022 as inflation took off and budget-conscious consumers needed to decide what or how much they drank.
Household spending on alcoholic beverages is now below the pre-pandemic trend.
On a per capita basis, sales numbers would look worse considering the large population growth of the last two years.
Figure 1.
Purchases of alcoholic beverages have trended downward since the pandemic boom
Total sales are split among more competitors.
As of July 2022, there were 2,766 beverage manufacturers in Canada, 15% more than in July 2019.
Input costs began increasing in late 2021 and into 2022.
The Industrial Product Price Index (IPPI) (measuring prices received by alcoholic beverage manufacturers) began increasing in mid-2022 (Figure 2) but did not fully offset higher input costs, squeezing manufacturers’ margins last year.
The manufacturers’ selling price started to decline in early 2023 (and even led to lower prices for wineries), reflecting a stabilization in input costs, weaker demand and competitive pressures in each market.
Figure 2.
Prices received by alcoholic beverage manufacturers are declining
The markets for hard seltzers and non-alcoholic beer are growing revenue streams.
The market share of ‘other’ alcoholic beverages is now 8.0%, up from 4.2% just four years ago.
The increased demand for non-alcoholic beverages could provide opportunities for manufacturers of alcoholic beverages to increase sales by utilizing supply chains and production processes already in place.
For a deeper dive into industry outlooks, click the sections below.
Consumer belts are tightening, and an economic slowdown is on the horizon.
Business agility to changing consumer tastes will be important for long-term growth as consumers’ preferences continue to shift and the country’s demographics change.
Cost management in a slowing or negative sales growth environment will be key to maintaining or growing margins.
All told, 2023 will be challenging for manufacturers of alcoholic beverages.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week tripled its list of symptoms for COVID-19, reflecting a growing understanding of the novel coronavirus and how it presents in patients.
The six new symptoms — muscle pain, chills, repeated shaking with chills, headache, sore throat and a new loss of sense of smell or taste — join the first-to-be-recognized trio of fever, cough and shortness of breath.
People with at least two of the newly-added symptoms may have COVID-19, the CDC says, even in the absence of other symptoms.
They are just the most common of an expanding list of “atypical” symptoms emerging as more people fall ill and healthcare workers and patients share their experiences of COVID-19, doctors treating the disease told Bridge.
“Of course everybody thinks about this as affecting the lungs and the respiratory tract, but it's doing a lot of things in other parts of the body as well,” said Dr. Alan Taege, an infectious disease specialist treating COVID-19 patients at The Cleveland Clinic in Ohio.
Better understanding the emerging constellation of symptoms, Taege and others say, should help healthcare workers in evaluating who should get tested for the novel coronavirus, and may also help reduce its spread — if people with headaches or sore throats treat these as possible signs of COVID-19, they may be more likely to stay away from others.
Here’s what we know about the symptoms of COVID-19, and what you should be looking for if you or a family member fall ill.
Most common — and worrisome — symptoms remain
Fever, cough and shortness of breath are still the most commonly reported symptoms of COVID-19, and doctors say these are still the symptoms that should, and do, send most people to the hospital.
But because most people who seek care are very sick by the time they get to the hospital, these symptoms may just be the last, and most obvious, in the progression of the disease.
“To be honest, we're probably not asking them much about headache and muscle pain, and some of these milder symptoms,” when a patient has a high fever or difficulty breathing, said Dr. Preeti Malani, chief health officer at Michigan Medicine Infectious Disease.
Malani and other doctors treating COVID-19 patients said almost all the hospitalized patients they see have a cough or shortness of breath.
Not all have a fever, though.
“Some of us will have a higher tendency to fight infection with fever… and others don’t,” said Dr. Odaliz Abreu Lanfranco, an infectious disease specialist at Henry Ford Health System.
“It’s not good or bad, it’s just one response of the body to infection.”
Rates of fever in those who show up to the hospital and are confirmed to have coronavirus have ranged from 30 percent in a large group of patients in New York, up to 99 percent of a much smaller sample in China, though in many cases where there was no initial fever, a fever developed at some point during the course of the illness, even if it was low.
Fever — or lack thereof — can be influenced by the immune system and medications a patient is taking, said Dr. Rachel Klamo, an osteopathic family physician who has treated patients with COVID-19 at Ascension Providence Rochester Hospital.
“Though fever is a valuable, objective tool, lack of a fever shouldn’t prevent someone from seeking care if they’re experiencing” a cough or shortness of breath.
‘Atypical symptoms’ are likely common
While the trio of fever, cough and difficulty breathing remain most common in people who are sick enough with the virus to seek medical care, there are likely symptoms that are far more common among those who stay home.
Some of these include the six added by the CDC to the coronavirus symptom list, but there are others, too.
“We will continue to see more things show up until we can really accumulate and analyze a lot of data, and we will find a very wide range of symptoms here,” said the Cleveland Clinic’s Taege.
Right now, these include gastrointestinal problems such as diarrhea, fatigue, confusion and apathy, weight loss, dehydration and lack of appetite, among others.
Some of these could be explained by the virus’s effect on the senses of smell and taste, which are intertwined.
It’s unclear why, or exactly how, but it seems that for some people (the exact percentage remains unclear) the virus causes a loss of sense of smell, a phenomenon called anosmia.
It’s not too surprising: other viruses that attack the respiratory system also cause anosmia.
Taege said he’s seen anosmia in about a third of his COVID-19 patients, though he admits this is a “highly unscientific” estimate.
However common it may be, or why it’s happening, the loss of smell can have dangerous consequences, particularly for people who are older or already ill, and can lead to a loss of appetite, weight loss and dehydration.
“They show up confused and lethargic, and typically they just stop eating and drinking and often appear apathetic and become much less active than what they normally would,” said Taege.
He advises those checking in on or caring for an older adult to watch for these symptoms, even in the absence of fever, cough, or difficulty breathing.
Perhaps the other most common, less-reported symptom of the novel coronavirus is fatigue — profound, crushing fatigue, doctors told Bridge.
“Though it’s not listed as a symptom, most of the patients are extremely fatigued, knocked out, kind of, from the infection,” said Klamo of Ascension, who treated about 25 patients with coronavirus in two days of rotation in April.
It would be rare, though, she said, for this to be the only symptom of the virus.
Many people infected by the novel coronavirus, particularly those who aren’t seriously ill, may have a single predominant symptom.
Young patients seem to have higher rates of diarrhea, for example, though this doesn’t usually become a problem unless there is severe dehydration as a result.
“Most of us who will have this infection either don't know about it or it just will go away,” said Abreu Lanfranco of Henry Ford, because symptoms are not severe enough to warrant seeking medical attention.
For now, knowing more about these less-reported symptoms of coronavirus isn’t having a big impact on patient care, or on who gets tested.
That’s because there still aren’t enough tests available in Michigan to expand testing to people with only mild or atypical symptoms, and there are no scientifically validated treatments beyond supportive care.
And going to the hospital if you only have mild symptoms won’t change your care (you’ll likely be sent home) but may expose more people unnecessarily to the virus.
But as testing expands, said Michigan Medicine’s Malani, knowledge of some of the more subtle indicators of the disease, especially in its early stages, should help public health officials decide how to target testing, and help convince people to stay home when they feel even mildly ill.
“When everyone is staying at home it's one thing, but as people start to re-engage in life, having a longer list of symptoms is helpful in the sense that maybe before you wouldn't have really thought about that sore throat, but now that means that you're not going to go to work today,” she said.
“If we get to a point where there's limited spread in the community and we really want to know if it's out there, then we might want to have a really low threshold to test people,” she said.
Much remains unknown
Still, much remains unknown about the virus, its symptoms, and what those symptoms can tell us about containing its spread.
The main problem with containing further outbreaks once stay-at-home orders are lifted is asymptomatic people, and those with few or very mild symptoms.
While it's still unclear exactly what proportion of people with coronavirus infection in the population have no symptoms, it could be larger than the 25 percent estimated by the CDC.
In New York, about 14 percent of 3,000 randomly tested people without symptoms tested positive for coronavirus antibodies, about 10 times the expected rate based on diagnostic testing there, according to Bloomberg.
Asymptomatic cases were even higher on the carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt (50 percent) and Diamond Princess cruise ship (18 percent).
And we still know very little about how and when these people are contagious, said Malani.
“Is it only people with symptoms, is it everybody?
Are you more contagious if you have more symptoms?
It seems like if you're coughing a lot, you might be more contagious, but it turns out it just depends,” she said.
Even within her own small social network, she added, she’s seen plenty of anecdotal evidence of the disease acting in less-than-predictable ways — older adults with mild or no symptoms at all, and younger, seemingly healthy people who become gravely ill.
“So the problem is that we're making these broad statements based on only snapshots,” she said.
“And until we have a full picture of what 50 million people with infection look like — not just the million that we happen to diagnose because they were sick enough to come to the hospital — we won’t know.”
That full picture could be coming in the next month or two, the doctors told Bridge.
What researchers discover could look very different in the United States compared to other parts of the world, said Abreu Lanfranco.
“You can't generalize how this is going to present, how this is going to affect your community without understanding the background of the community that you care for,” he said, adding that Detroit’s large African-American population, high level of poverty and incidence of chronic disease make the situation there different than China, or even other parts of the United States.
Fully understanding the virus and its symptoms, including the atypical ones, may also mean that we find that far more people have died of COVID-19 than previously thought.
As lockdowns continue and people have become increasingly reluctant to go to the hospital, some particularly hard-hit cities, such as Detroit, New York and Boston, have recorded higher than usual numbers of deaths at home from unknown causes.
“Now, as they're looking back, [the deaths] could well have been COVID-19,” said Taege.
“And probably a lot of these people had atypical or minor symptoms.”
RESOURCES:
When pop icon Olivia Rodrigo sang, “Do you get déjà vu?”
she was directing the lyric at her ex-boyfriend and his new lookalike girlfriend.
While you may not be able to relate to her past paramour’s penchant for identical love interests, this particular line is pretty darn relatable.
Advertisement Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center.
Advertising on our site helps support our mission.
We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
An estimated 97% of people have experienced déjà vu at least once in their lives.
This condition, which translates in French to “already seen,” is a transitory sensation of having already lived a totally identical situation at some point in the past.
But why does it happen?
And is there a medical explanation for it?
Neurologist Jean Khoury, MD, delves deeper into this fleeting phenomenon and what it could mean for your health.
What is déjà vu?
You probably know the feeling: You’re in the midst of a conversation or an activity when, all of a sudden, you’re overwhelmed by the sensation that you’ve done this exact same thing before — but you know that’s not possible.
“Déjà vu is a false sense of familiarity,” Dr. Khoury says.
“Your brain creates a sensation as if you have lived a certain situation before, but you’re unable to retrieve it from your memory and cannot identify the actual situation.”
What does déjà vu feel like?
In 1983, Dr. Vernon Neppe defined déjà vu as a “subjectively inappropriate impression of familiarity of a present experience with an undefined past.”
In simple terms, that means that when you have déjà vu, you feel like you’re experiencing something that you almost certainly couldn’t have.
“There’s usually an incongruence between the sense of familiarity and the fact that the situation should not feel familiar,” Dr. Khoury explains.
It’s not like taking the same bus route each day and recognizing the scenery — that’s familiarity.
Déjà vu, on the other hand, is when you feel like you’ve had this exact same conversation or experienced this very specific scenario in the past, all while also knowing that it can’t have ever happened before.
What causes déjà vu to happen?
You may not be a magician, but when you experience déjà vu, your brain is creating an illusion.
This is thought to happen when there’s a bit of a miscommunication between two parts of your brain.
“Déjà vu is caused by dysfunctional connections between the parts of your brain that play a role in memory recollection and familiarity,” Dr. Khoury further explains.
You have two temporal lobes, one on each side of your head — right above your temples.
They play an important role in helping you to:
Recall words.
Remember places you’ve been.
Recognize people.
Understand language.
Interpret other people’s emotions.
In each temporal lobe is a hippocampus, which contributes to many of these functions and is responsible for storing your short-term memories.
Occasionally, like during certain types of seizures, your hippocampus and surrounding brain tissue can be activated, causing you to have memory experiences like déjà vu.
“This causes a disruption of recognition memory systems, which gives you that false sense of familiarity,” Dr. Khoury says.
Is déjà vu normal?
It’s not uncommon or inherently unhealthy to experience déjà vu every now and then.
It’s most likely to happen to people who are 15 to 25 years old, and your likelihood of experiencing it decreases progressively as you age.
It also happens more frequently during evenings and on weekends than during weekdays.
There are some other things we know about déjà vu, though researchers aren’t exactly sure why.
For example, you’re more susceptible to déjà vu if you:
Have a high level of education.
Travel a lot.
Remember your dreams.
Hold liberal beliefs.
Advertisement
“Déjà vu is a rare phenomenon in healthy individuals, usually occurring a couple times a year,” Dr. Khoury says.
“If it becomes more frequent or is associated with other symptoms, though, it’s important to have it addressed.”
Is déjà vu a seizure?
Experiencing déjà vu doesn’t mean you’re having a seizure.
But in some cases, it can be a symptom of temporal lobe epilepsy, a seizure disorder that starts in the temporal lobe area of your brain.
“The hippocampus plays a role in recall and conscious recollection; the parahippocampal gyrus, which is also in the temporal lobe, plays a role in familiarity discrimination.
When you have epilepsy, there’s usually a disruption of this connection,” Dr. Khoury explains.
Temporal lobe epilepsy may be accompanied by tonic-clonic seizures, which cause uncontrollable convulsions and other muscle movements.
Déjà vu associated with this type of epilepsy is also often associated with a loss of awareness, shaking, tongue-biting, urine loss and post-seizure confusion.
Is it ever cause for concern?
Déjà vu may be a sign of underlying health concerns.
“Stress and exhaustion can contribute to déjà vu,” Dr. Khoury notes.
“But it can also be a sign of seizure disorders, migraines and disorders affecting the memory.”
People who have frontotemporal dementia, for example, often experience persistent déjà vu and tend to try to rationalize the illusion.
Your feelings of déjà vu may be representative of a health issue if they’re accompanied by other symptoms, like:
Confusion.
Headaches.
Loss of awareness.
Weakness.
Seizures.
Shaking.
When déjà vu signals a problem
That occasional “I’ve been here before” experience probably isn’t anything to worry about.
But if you start experiencing déjà vu more often than that, it’s time to see a doctor.
Make an appointment with a healthcare provider if your déjà vu:
Occurs a few times a month or more often (versus just a few times a year).
Is followed by loss of consciousness.
Is accompanied by abnormal, dream-like memories or visual scenes.
Comes with symptoms like unconscious chewing, fumbling, a racing heart or a feeling of fear.
Don’t let persistent or worrisome déjà vu linger.
If you have any doubt about the cause of your déjà vu, it’s important to consult with a healthcare provider or go straight to a neurologist.
In the last few months, experts say that there has been an uptick in the number of patients with fibromyalgia — a painful condition leading to fatigue in joints, chest wall, elbows, legs, shoulder, and also headache.
Dr Girish L Bhalerao, super specialty consultant orthopaedic surgeon, Wockhardt Hospital Mira Road says, “Around 15-20 cases have been observed in the last two to four months.
We have observed more women complaining of the condition compared to men among the middle aged and elderly population.”
There were many health problems that came to the fore during the pandemic, and one of them is fibromyalgia, adds Dr Gaurav Khera, orthopedic Surgeon (Karol Bagh)
Apollo Spectra Delhi.
Advertisement
“It is a painful and chronic condition leading to muscle pain along with fatigue, sleep disturbances, mood-related disorders, and memory problems.
So, patients will notice pain in the shoulders, chest, elbows, and joints.
Furthermore, one may also experience constant fatigue, stress, anxiety, sleep problems, mood swings, and memory fog.
The symptoms may be similar to arthritis, but it does not cause joint or muscle inflammation.
It impacts the soft tissue and not the joints as a whole.
Fibromyalgia is also a long covid symptom known as FibroCovid.
It is seen commonly in women compared to men,” Dr Khera explains.
One may also experience constant fatigue, stress, anxiety, sleep problems, mood swings, and memory fog (Source: Getty Images/Thinkstock) One may also experience constant fatigue, stress, anxiety, sleep problems, mood swings, and memory fog (Source: Getty Images/Thinkstock)
Dr Rakesh Nair, consultant knee replacement surgeon at Zen Multispeciality Hospital informs that “a lot of patients have complained of increase in joint pains post-Covid: almost all had increased pain which varied from three weeks to six months”.
“Patients suffering from this condition experience sudden shoulder, joint, elbow, and chest pain.
This pain can be triggered due to the stress, tension, and emotional disturbance due to coronavirus and also deficiency of calcium: vitamin D 3 and vitamin B12 which aggravated the symptoms.
Women of post-menopausal status had increased pain compared to men.
The pain is there for some months and one may have some trigger points in the body,” he says.
According to Dr Bhalerao, while the causes of fibromyalgia are not known yet, genetics and viral infections can play a role in its occurrence.
“Prompt medical attention, cognitive therapy, and adopting healthy lifestyle practices can be beneficial in tackling fibromyalgia.
Self-care can help you to manage the painful symptoms.
Try to stay calm and stress-free by doing deep breathing exercises, getting enough sleep, exercising daily like swimming, walking, aerobics, or stretching, and eating a well-balanced diet.
Do not neglect any symptoms like shoulder, joint pain, sleep issues, memory problems, or even physical exhaustion,” he says.
Advertisement
📣
For more lifestyle news, follow us on Instagram | Twitter | Facebook and don’t miss out on the latest updates!
"Eye cancer" is a general term used to describe the types of cancer that can develop on or within the eye.
It is very rare.
The American Cancer Society estimates that fewer than 4,000 people per year will be diagnosed with eye cancer.
This cancer is typically very treatable but must be addressed as soon as possible for the best outcomes.
When people speak of eye cancer, they are usually referring to ocular melanoma, the most common type of eye cancer found in adults.
However, eye cancer can occur in children in the form of a disease called retinoblastoma.
PhotoAlto / Odilon Dimier / Getty Images
Symptoms
In the early stages of eye cancer, there may be few, if any, symptoms.
In fact, it is not unusual for an eye doctor to be the first person to notice abnormalities that may signal cancer.
The healthcare provider may find eye cancer during a routine eye exam.
Symptoms of eye cancer can vary from person to person based on the type of cancer involved.
In adults, the most common symptoms include:
These symptoms do not always mean you have eye cancer.
However, it is important to get the symptoms checked by a healthcare provider as soon as possible, since they may signal another health problem.
Symptoms of Retinoblastoma
The most common form of pediatric eye cancer is retinoblastoma, a disease that affects around 300 children in the United States every year.
While it is mainly diagnosed in children 2 years of age and under, it can affect other age groups, as well.
Symptoms of retinoblastoma include:
A white pupil (leukocoria)
Misaligned or crossed eyes (strabismus)
A different colored iris in each eye
Eye pain caused by the development of glaucoma (less common)
It is not uncommon for parents to first notice the condition when they see a photograph of their child.
They might notice that one of the child’s eyes reacts normally to the flash (creating the typical red-eye appearance) while the other shows a bright white pupil (leukocoria).
In some cases, the eye might look like a cat's eye or look otherwise anmormal.
When to See a Healthcare Provider
If you are experiencing any changes in your eye and/or vision, contact your primary care provider.
You will likely be referred to an eye specialist called an ophthalmologist.
Diagnosis is fairly simple, typically requiring a visual examination of the eye with an ophthalmoscope (a lighted medical instrument).
Meanwhile, if you have even the slightest suspicion your child has the symptoms of retinoblastoma, see your pediatrician immediately.
Retinoblastoma is an especially aggressive form of childhood cancer.
It is also one of the most treatable; more than 90% of children can be cured with treatment.
Early detection and treatment are keys to avoiding any visual impairment or damage to the eye.
If you suspect an adult or child may have symptoms of eye cancer, do not shine a flashlight directly into the eye.
Direct light can cause damage (particularly in children with still-developing retinas).
Ophthalmoscopes are specifically calibrated to emit the appropriate amount of light for adults and children; flashlights are not.
Summary
Eye cancers are very rare.
They can be very serious but are often treatable if caught early.
Be sure to see a healthcare provider if you or your child is having any symptoms or changes to your eyes.
A Word From Verywell
Any kind of cancer is scary, but one that can affect your vision is especially concerning.
Eye cancer can also occur in children who may not be able to describe or report changes in their vision.
Retinoblastoma can have an inherited component, so be sure to tell your healthcare team if anyone in your family has this condition.
Seymour first noticed that there was blood in his stools.
Seeing this change, he knew it could be a symptom of cancer, and decided to consult his doctor.
Seymour was diagnosed with stage four colorectal cancer, which had metastasized in the liver.
Geoffrey said, as quoted by Express UK, “I’ve always looked after myself, so to get the diagnosis was huge.
It was like being wrapped in a paper bag that’s on fire, but I’ve always had the knack of being able to find my way out of tricky situations and never giving up is just my thing.”
The Employment Tribunal has ruled that insurance company Direct Line owed damages to a former employee, having failed to make reasonable adjustments for her experiencing symptoms of menopause.
The claimant received £64,645 in damages, having resigned from the insurer citing unfavourable treatment.
Trainee solicitor Grace Horvath-Franco spoke to HR Magazine following the ruling, and explains the significance in more detail here.
Background to the tribunal case
The claimant worked at Direct Line from April 2016 and performed well in her role for four years.
In 2019 she began to develop menopause symptoms including “brain fog” and difficulties concentrating and retaining information.
She also become “less resilient to life’s vicissitudes”, and was frequently tearful.
Initially a supportive line manager helped minimise the problems resulting from this, but the situation worsened in 2020.
Following criticisms of the claimant’s performance in May 2020, her managers transferred her to a lower paying role, rather than making adjustments to her existing role.
The tribunal heard that the claimant struggled to meet the performance requirements in the new job, finding it difficult to access computer systems and struggling for words when she spoke.
On multiple occasions that year, the claimant’s manager criticised her performance, wrongly categorising the claimant’s struggles as a confidence issue.
In January 2021, the claimant’s manager informed her she would not be receiving a pay rise because her performance was rated “need for improvement”.
Formal performance management proceedings commenced in April, and in September the claimant’s sick pay was discontinued because “her level of absence was unsustainable to the business”.
Why did this amount to disability discrimination?
Though the claimant had previously explained to her manager that “her disability and associated symptoms of menopause were impacting on her ability to retain information and her emotional stability”, her manager had reported to HR that there were no mitigating reasons for her performance level.
While the tribunal dismissed the claims of constructive unfair dismissal, and sex and age-related complaints, it upheld the claims relating to reasonable adjustments and section 15 Equality Act 2010 (“EqA 2010”) complaints relying on symptoms of menopause.
Section 15 EqA 2010 applies where a disabled person is treated unfairly because of something arising from their disability, and it cannot be demonstrated this treatment is “a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.”
The judgment notes that: “In January 2023 the respondent conceded the claimant was a disabled person by reason of menopause symptoms, namely low mood, anxiety, mood swings, poor self-esteem, effects on memory and poor concentration.
At the start of this hearing the respondent further conceded that it knew or ought reasonably to have known of the claimant’s disability in June 2020.
“The claimant alleged it ought reasonably to have known by January 2020 because the respondent should have sought occupational health advice from that point on and from March she had reported her symptoms and treatment.
Her reasonable adjustments case (despite a valiant effort to bring this forward in submissions) began from 1 July when she moved to a new role.”
What implications does this have for employers?
As demonstrated by this case, there will be instances where the menopause amounts to a ‘disability’ as defined by the EqA 2010.
Whether or not the menopause is a disability will always be dependent on the symptoms experienced by an individual and assessed on a case-by-case basis.
Ultimately, only an Employment Tribunal can determine whether or not a physical or mental impairment, using the language in the EqA 2010, is a disability.
In order to satisfy the test for disability in the legislation an impairment must have a substantial and long-term effect on an individual’s their ability to carry out normal daily activities.
If an individual going through the menopause suffers memory loss, reduced concentration and severe anxiety one can see how the test for disability might be satisfied.
What can employers do to support employees experiencing menopausal symptoms?
An employer must comply with its duties under the EqA 2010, including making reasonable adjustments.
We would suggest that all employers consider making reasonable adjustments to assist employees overcome difficulties at work they may experience as a result of the menopause regardless of whether they may have a disability.
Examples of adjustments include ensuring a comfortable working temperature in the office; flexibility around start and finish times; and encouraging affected staff to take regular rest breaks.
It is important that staff experiencing the menopause are supported at work.
Sophisticated employers will have policies and processes in place to help line managers support staff.
Line managers should also receive coaching and training to help them identify the symptoms of menopause and recognise the impact it may have on individuals in the workplace.
You can find further information regarding our expertise, experience and team on our Employment page.
If you require assistance from our team, please contact us.
Subscribe – In order to receive our news straight to your inbox, subscribe here.
Our newsletters are sent no more than once a month.
If you or someone you know is struggling with depression, you’re far from alone.
In 2020, 8.4 percent of U.S. adults — approximately 21 million people — had at least one major depressive episode, according to the National Institute of Mental Health.
What’s more, a study from 2020 found that the prevalence of depression symptoms tripled in the United States during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Depression symptoms aren’t always as obvious as frequent crying and overwhelming despair.
“Oftentimes the changes are subtle, and the person may not notice, but their friends and loved ones may,” says Boadie Dunlop, MD, director of the mood and anxiety disorders program in the psychiatry department at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta.
There’s no one pattern to depression, and the condition can vary in progression from person to person.
Symptoms may gradually go from mild, such as choosing to stay home to watch TV instead of going out for a walk with a friend, to more severe, such as not even getting out of bed to shower or persistent thoughts of suicide.
Others may quickly progress from their usual state to a severe depressive episode.
“Depression symptoms are particularly troubling if someone displays more than one or if they persist for more than two weeks,” says Simon Rego, PsyD, a professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at Albert Einstein College of Medicine and the chief of psychology at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, New York.
Adults who received the once-weekly shot also had greater weight loss, losing on average over 13 percent of their body weight compared with close to 3 percent with a placebo, after 52 weeks' treatment.
All people who enrolled in the STEP HFpEF study had heart failure with preserved ejection fraction — a type of heart failure where the heart pumps normally but doesn't relax enough to fill properly — and obesity.
The results were published Friday in the New England Journal of Medicine.
The news adds to the growing hoard of evidence of the benefits of the drug for patients who have other conditions alongside obesity.
Earlier this month, the Danish drugmaker reported that Wegovy cut the risk of heart attack or stroke by 20 percent in those with obesity or who are overweight, compared with a placebo.
Money, money, money
For Novo, the data adds weight to the case for governments to pay for the product.
Demand has soared for Wegovy since results showed that people lost some 15 percent of their body weight in a clinical trial, versus those on a placebo.
However, many state-run coverage systems, including in the U.S. and Germany, do not cover obesity products.
“We will aim to seek reimbursement for those patients who have the highest BMI, have comorbidities and [are] perhaps also less fortunate from a socioeconomic point of view,” CEO Lars Fruergaard Jørgensen told Reuters in a broadcast interview on Friday.
“We believe that there will probably be no country that will be able to fund for obesity care for everybody living with obesity, because you have in some countries around half of the population living with obesity.”
Novo has so far launched Wegovy in Norway, Germany, the U.S and the company’s home turf of Denmark.
Jørgensen said the company was on track to manufacture about 1 billion doses by the end of the year.
No further launches have been announced, since supplies are squeezed and patients require treatment for at least two years.
Asked by Reuters whether treatment is likely to last longer than this, Jørgensen said he considered obesity to be a chronic disease, “which means that you have to keep taking your medicine.”
However, data to date is limited to two years, he added.
Research:
Long Covid vs. Perimenopause or Menopause
There are many women diagnosed with Long Covid yet very few are considered to be perimenopausal or menopausal by their clinicians.
The symptoms of Long Covid, menopause and perimenopause are exactly the same.
Many women are saying that they think their own hormones are contributing to their Long Covid symptoms yet they are not being offered HRT.
Dr Louise Newson and team at her not-for-profit company, Newson Health Research and Education, recently hosted a survey asking about Long Covid symptoms and whether healthcare professionals had discussed hormones or provided any treatment for perimenopausal or menopausal symptoms.
It is staggering to find 51% of participants did not experience any conversation with their healthcare professional about their hormones or perimenopausal or menopausal symptoms.
This is despite the vast majority of women thinking that some of their Long Covid symptoms could be due to their perimenopause or menopause.
Dr Louise Newson has seen quite a few women in her clinic who have been diagnosed with Long Covid yet are also perimenopausal or menopausal.
Many of their symptoms have really improved with a combination of oestrogen and testosterone.
Women with Long Covid should download the free app balance, fill out the symptom questionnaire and track their symptoms (and periods if they are having them).
They should then download their Health Report© and show this to their healthcare professional and use this to start their conversation about taking HRT.
Those experiencing the perimenopause or menopause with Long Covid should not be denied HRT.
£20 million has recently been invested in Long Covid research yet none of these studies are looking at female hormones.
This needs to change.
Women deserve to be listened to.
You can read more about Long Covid and the perimenopause and menopause our news article here:
LOADING ERROR LOADING
Nearly 11,000 people in the UK could be living with undiagnosed breast cancer due to the Covid-19 pandemic, a charity has warned.
Breast Cancer Now calculated that fewer referrals and less access to treatment, coupled with a pause to breast screening programmes, meant 10,700 fewer people were diagnosed with breast cancer between March and December 2020 than it would have expected.
Advertisement
The team analysed a range of data to reach the figure, including the number of people starting their first treatment for breast cancer, the number of women screened each month and the length of time for which services were paused.
Even though services have resumed, the charity said they are operating at around 60% capacity due to the need for social distancing and infection control.
It warned of a forthcoming “perfect storm”, with health workers in imaging and diagnostic services under unprecedented pressure due to the pandemic, having already been “chronically under-resourced” beforehand.
Advertisement
One in 10 women in the UK have never checked their breasts for signs of cancer, a survey by Breast Cancer Now revealed in October, and almost half don’t check their breasts regularly.
Asked what stops or prevents people from checking their breasts regularly, almost half (46%) said they forget to do so.
Anyone of any gender should be checking their breasts regularly, as men and non-binary people can also get breast cancer.
Breast Cancer Now recommends doing a check at least every six weeks.
So, what are the signs to be aware of?
When asked more about why they aren’t doing regular breast checks, one fifth (21%) of women said they are ‘not confident’ about what new or unusual changes they should be looking for.
Manveet Basra, head of public health and wellbeing at Breast Cancer Now, says many women may know that a lump can be a possible symptom of breast cancer, but it’s “vital” to know that there are other signs to be aware of too.
These are:
A lump
Thickening of breast tissue that feels different from the rest of the breast
Nipple discharge
Dimpling or puckering of the skin of the breast (looks like orange peel)
The breast looking red or inflamed
Swelling in the upper chest or armpit
A change in breast size or shape
Your nipple becomes inverted or changes shape
Constant pain in your breast or armpit
While most breast changes won’t be cancer, it’s crucial you get any new or unusual breast changes checked by your GP right away.
Advertisement
Ron Chapple via Getty Images
How to do a breast check
You should do a breast check every six weeks if possible.
It might help to set a reminder on your phone if you often forget to do it.
Making these checks part of your routine – such as in the shower or when you apply moisturiser – can help you to remember to do it regularly, suggests Basra.
She says there’s “no special technique” for doing a check.
You should feel your breasts regularly to get to know what’s normal for you, so you can spot any new or unusual changes.
A breast check should also include your armpits and the area up to your collarbone for any changes.
Watch the helpful video above from breast cancer awareness charity CoppaFeel!
for more tips on checking your breasts.
If you do notice something’s amiss, book an appointment to see your GP, who will also need to check your breast area.
Advertisement
Breast Cancer Now is encouraged that 87% of women who have not had breast cancer said they would visit a doctor if they noticed a new or unusual breast change to get this checked.
Some said they wouldn’t, however, due to feelings of awkwardness or embarrassment, being too busy, or not wanting to bother their GP in the pandemic.
GP surgeries are currently running with extra safety measures in place to reduce the risk of spreading Covid-19.
They are urging people with any symptoms of cancer to book an appointment.
Getting any symptoms checked is hugely important – and the sooner you do it, the better the outcome if it is a sign of cancer.
Lily Godsoe takes her daily dose of liquid tumeric at home in Half Moon Bay.
Godsoe got COVID in March 2020 and has suffered for more then two years with long COVID.
She said that although acupuncture helped relieve some symptoms last fall, it wasn’t until she bought a large bottle of high-potency turmeric elixir at Costco that her most vexing symptom — deep lung pain — vanished.
Lea Suzuki/The Chronicle
UPDATE:
These are the 12 most common long COVID symptoms identified in a new study
After feeling deep, aching pain in her right lung for two years following COVID-19, Lily Godsoe of Half Moon Bay is grateful to the woman who made the anguish go away.
Her savior wasn’t the doctor who peered at her X-rays and prescribed inhalers that didn’t help.
It was the Costco vendor who sold her an elixir of turmeric, extra-strength, on sale for $20.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
Godsoe never got her name.
But in April the vendor prescribed three daily teaspoons of the orange liquid — always chilled.
In a week, Godsoe was a believer.
“I realized that I felt well.
It was really shocking,” said Godsoe, 54, an interfaith minister so debilitated by long COVID that she had to quit her job.
“I had forgotten what it felt like to feel normal.”
Godsoe didn’t know that the Food and Drug Administration had its eye on the turmeric maker, Quten Research Institute in New Jersey, whose “therapeutic anti-inflammatory” claim for the plant-based product earned a rebuke in 2020 for “misbranding.”
But it might not have mattered.
To Godsoe and thousands of other long-COVID sufferers whose doctors have been unable to relieve their mysterious symptoms, such unproven, poorly tested, or just off-label remedies provide hope and — sometimes — help.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
The names read like cure-alls touted by 19th century hucksters: hyperbaric oxygen, intravenous ozone, herbal tollovid, the Patterson Protocol.
Some are under serious study by scientists seeking verifiable treatments.
Others could be quackery, or even harmful.
“There’s always the danger that people will try things they shouldn’t,” said Lisa McCorkell of Oakland, a co-founder of the Patient-Led Research Collaborative, a nonprofit seeking to speed up the search for good long-COVID treatments.
Colin Bennett, 34, has already spent a remarkable $100,000 on untested therapies and do-it-yourself remedies in hopes of conquering the barrage of post-viral symptoms that turned the financial analyst and golfer into a de facto old man since he got the virus a year ago.
But he only went rogue — even flirting with the notorious horse dewormer, ivermectin — after doctors at Stanford, the University of Southern California, three UC schools and various ERs failed to alleviate his ailments: brain fog, maddening tinnitus, varicose veins, hair loss, rapid heartbeat (a common long-COVID symptom called postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, or POTS) and chest pain that, at its worst, “felt like someone was stabbing me with a super-heated poker.”
The list goes on.
“I never had any problems before COVID,” said Bennett, of Los Angeles.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
His desperation led him to drop $1,500 on hyperbaric oxygen therapy to rejuvenate his tissues.
A double-blind Israeli study of 73 long-COVID patients, published in July in the peer-reviewed journal Nature Scientific Reports, suggests this can actually work.
Researchers found much-improved brain function in the half who got oxygen.
Bob Lambertsen, safety director of Hyperbaric Medical Services of San Francisco, monitors a patient in a hyperbaric chamber.
Lea Suzuki/The Chronicle
At Hyperbaric Medical Services and Wound Care in San Francisco, patients lie in a clear chamber with oxygen equal to scuba-diving at 30 feet — then watch Netflix for 90 minutes.
Patients with a variety of illnesses often have vascular damage, said Dr. Jamie Bigelow, the board-certified hyperbaric physician specialist who runs the center.
Oxygen can stimulate new growth in the tiniest capillaries.
But it can take many sessions.
Each now costs $500 and isn’t covered by insurance.
Of three long-COVID patients who sprang for them, a man with neuropsychological symptoms needed 60 sessions to improve, Bigelow said.
After a recent price increase, that would be $30,000.
A man with POTS benefited after 10 tries, while a woman with the same condition found no relief after 20.
Bennett went 10 times in Southern California.
“I didn’t really notice much,” he said.
He then tried popping pineapple enzyme pills to “help with blocking the ACE2 receptors” that are implicated in opening cell doors to COVID-19, and took N-acetyl cysteine, a supplement popular with long-COVID sufferers and sold as NAC.
It promises “free radical protection.”
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
In November, Bennett heard about exosomes, which carry molecules between cells in service of the immune system.
A friend bought Bennett a $5,000 infusion when he was in bad shape.
“He wanted his golf buddy back,” Bennett mused.
But the exosomes didn’t help.
Nor did the electromagnetic therapy, though he slept better for awhile.
“When you’re this screwed up, you try everything,” he said.
Even stem cells.
At Christmas, Bennett spent $5,000 on 500 million of them that a doctor friend picked up in Mexico.
“Sounds kind of shady,” he admitted.
“I was so desperate that I didn’t care if it killed me.”
Bennett’s tour de treatments wouldn’t have been complete without a visit to the one doctor in the Bay Area, perhaps the country, who claims to cure nearly all long-COVID patients.
“Eighty-five percent of patients get better.
Maybe more,” said Dr. Bruce Patterson, who developed the “Patterson Protocol” at his San Carlos company, IncellDX, Inc.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
There are no peer-reviewed studies to verify this.
But that hasn’t stopped long-COVID sufferers — 30,000 of them, Patterson says — from requesting test kits, virtual consultations, and scores measuring the severity of five common symptoms.
Yet everyone gets the same two drugs: A cholesterol-lowering statin and Maraviroc, an HIV anti-viral.
“Six to 12 weeks” is all it takes to get better, he claims.
Patterson, an associate professor at Stanford University in the 2000s who directed a virology lab there until 2011, works with other doctors who prescribe the drugs.
One is Dean Mitchell, a New York immunologist who has monitored 20 people on the Patterson Protocol over six months.
“I’m cautiously optimistic that some of them have improved,” Mitchell said.
“I’m watching and waiting.”
One happy customer referred to a reporter by the company, Susan Pi of Oakland, said she was so pleased that she canceled her appointment at Stanford’s long-COVID clinic.
A ghost writer who got sick in 2020, Pi, now 40, suffered fatigue and post-exertional malaise for a year.
“I’m fully recovered, thanks to the Patterson group,” she reported.
Colin Bennett, 34, who spent about $100,000 on everything from stem cell infusions to the animal dewormer ivermectin to try to cure his many long COVID symptoms, was admitted to an Orange County emergency room last year during an especially difficult period.
His do-it-yourself methods worked no better than standard medical therapies, he said.
Provided by Colin Bennett
Bennett, though, quit halfway through.
“I didn’t think it was helping,” he said.
Insurance covered most of the protocol, but he’s out $1,000 for the tests.
Now he takes only fistfuls of ginkgo biloba pills (a plant-based supplement reputed to sharpen thinking) and has improved enough on his own to return to work part-time.
Dr. Lekshmi Santhosh, co-director of UCSF’s post-COVID clinic, cautioned against embracing unproven treatments.
She offered a car analogy: If your car’s brakes failed, would you fix them with a new steering wheel?
“Because long COVID encompasses so many different symptoms, one size usually doesn’t fit all when it comes to treatment,” Santhosh said, acknowledging that research is “frustratingly slow.”
McCorkell, of the Patient-Led Research Collaborative, agreed.
“We try to push for things that have been researched or validated by the community,” she said.
“But it’s a tricky balance.”
Anisha Sekar of San Francisco ran ultramarathons before getting COVID two years ago.
Now 31, she needs a wheelchair to go through the airport.
The tech entrepreneur says there is “exactly one” doctor who has earned her trust because she is open to trying novel but safe treatments, including prescriptions approved for other purposes.
Such “off-label” uses are gold in the long-COVID community.
Sekar takes four that have helped, despite their having been approved only for narcolepsy, heart ailments, muscle weakness and allergies.
She gets most of her treatment ideas from long-COVID forums on Reddit and Body Politic.
“I keep my ear to the ground,” she said.
“And if I hear it enough, I’ll take it to my primary care physician and she’ll chime in with, ‘the science makes sense,’ or it doesn’t.”
Her nine over-the-counter remedies include, yes, turmeric.
Godsoe, whose relentless lung pain vanished after she began sipping turmeric, also credits six months of acupuncture with calming other post-COVID symptoms, from rapid heartbeat to joint pain.
The needle treatment — in her arms, legs, torso and head — cost $140 a week.
“I really had given up hope that I was ever going to feel OK,” Godsoe said, her voice filling with emotion.
Acupuncture wasn’t a total cure.
But making her own treatment choices has felt therapeutic in itself.
“A sense of wellness came over me,” she said.
And as symptoms eased, “I was so elated.”
This content is only available to USA TODAY subscribers.
Original reporting that provides diverse perspectives on news and issues of today.
Original reporting that provides diverse perspectives on news and issues of today.
Our most popular newsletter, Daily Briefing, to keep you updated on the day's top stories.
Our most popular newsletter, Daily Briefing, to keep you updated on the day's top stories.
Covid delirium, more common among elderly, can affect young people too and is caused by the body's reaction to the Covid-19 virus.
Covid delirium happens when a person slips into a state of confusion, agitation and is not able to think clearly.
As per the study posted in the journal JAMA Network Open, it is the sixth most common presenting symptom in all patients.
Long term hospitalisation, steroids, different combination of medication slows down the neural activity.
Covid-19 just like a lot of body function affects brain too.
(Also read: Brain stroke, heart-related issues saw uptick after Covid: Experts) Covid delirium: How Covid attacks brain; know common symptoms(Twitter/AusStemCell)
HOW COVID ATTACKS BRAIN
"The neurons within a person’s brain may be harmed by the virus.
ACE2 receptors, receptors that are contained within a brain’s neurons, are very similar to the receptors found in the lungs.
This might serve as a point for COVID to attack certain cells in the brain too, says Dr Milan Balakrishnan, Consultant Psychiatrist, Masina Hospital, Mumbai.
Unlock exclusive access to the latest news on India's general elections, only on the HT App.
Download Now!
Download Now!
"Due to lack of oxygen, Covid patients may face delirium.
This is because the COVID virus primarily affects the lungs, which ultimately causes an effect on the oxygen level parameters.
Also, maybe because the body of a COVID-infected person may overreact to the virus as a response mechanism to fight back, there may be the development of inflammation, which can cause the blocking of blood to the infected person’s brain," added Dr Balakrishnan.
SYMPTOMS OF COVID DELIRIUM
- It may put patients at risk for memory impairment, brain fog, confusion, and lack of focus and concentration.
Happy hypoxia is a case that develops due to a severe fall in oxygen saturation.
Some neurological diseases and brain damage can aggravate this dangerous dip in oxygen levels.
- It also puts people at risk for mood disorders like depression.
It may also trigger psychosis in some patients.
EARLY SIGNS OF BRAIN DAMAGE
As per the study on Covid's neurological manifestations published in the journal, Neurology, there are certain indicators for early signs of brain damage.
These indicators cited include confusion, agitation, and some neurological complications.
"The Journal of Clinical Immunology and Immunotherapy found that delirium development also depends on other mild-neurological symptoms.
These can be a loss of sense of smell or taste which may increase risk.
Delirium and brain fog are both very critical symptoms that can be caused due to Covid.
A decline in brain function is already a registered concern, but the fact that Covid can aggravate this is now another serious concern.
People facing symptoms should seek immediate and necessary therapy at the earliest stages possible to allow prevention and early treatment of the same," says Dr Balakrishnan.
Follow more stories on Facebook & Twitter
A Scots mum initially thought her tumour symptoms were being caused by hay fever before medics discovered a golf-ball sized mass in her brain.
Suzanne Davies was given just 12 months to live after being diagnosed with a glioblastoma multiforme in 2014 - but has beaten the odds to survive eight more years.
The busy 44-year-old told how she thought she was just tired and suffering from a pollen allergy when she began having issues with her speech and regular headaches.
She sought help from a GP who gave her a full check up and agreed that her condition was likely being caused by the allergies or stress.
But after her symptoms worsened over the weekend, leaving her unable to get out of bed, Suzanne contacted a second doctor who found she had lost the ability to read and sent her for an urgent brain CT scan at Aberdeen Royal Infirmary.
After medics found the large mass, Suzanne underwent a gruelling surgery which saw doctors cut 95 per cent of the tumour out while she was awake on the operating table.
And while her symptoms greatly reduced, the treasury assistant was sadly told her condition was terminal but has vowed to fight for her family.
She said: “I thought I had fatigue because I was working and had two young children at home
but then my speech began to deteriorate and I started to get headaches.
“They thought the tumour had been growing for at least a year before but I felt nothing until I started taking funny turns when I was in meetings at work.
I'd just get really confused and lose my speech completely.
(Image: Brain Tumour Research)
“But I've had hay fever since I was born basically and it was coming to that time of the year where you'd start getting symptoms so I thought it was that.
I mentioned that to the doctor and he checked every single part of me that he could and he agreed that maybe it was that.
“But over the weekend, I just got worse and worse.
It was absolutely horrendous to the point that I couldn't get up because my headache was that bad.
Nothing was working to take the pain away
“I called my mum and asked her to take me to the doctor.
I had written all my symptoms down on my phone because my speech had got so bad.
I was losing words.
She asked me to try read out of a newspaper but I couldn't get the words out so she sent me straight to the hospital.
“I said to her later on what had been happening and she said she had a pretty good idea of what was wrong with me.
After the surgery, most of the problems had gone.
My speech was better, and I felt almost back to normal, it was crazy.
“I didn’t want to know how long I had to live, but the consultant didn’t give me a chance to speak and just came out with the fact that I only had a year to live.
It was horrible and I was in total shock.
The whole family and I were broken.
“Even though I’m a very positive person, I got upset when I thought about my children, but then I thought ‘no, I’m going nowhere’.”
Suzanne underwent chemotherapy and radiotherapy, which resulted in her losing patches of her hair, so she decided to shave it all off.
She now has an MRI scan every six months and the most recent scan in June was stable.
Suzanne has been putting collection pots in shops to help raise money for Brain Tumour Research, and she plans to do more fundraising.
She added: “I get frustrated that there isn’t currently a cure for brain tumours, so more money is needed so more research can be done.
Get the latest headlines sent straight to your inbox with our newsletter Did you know you can keep up to date with the latest news by signing up to our daily newsletter?
We send a morning and lunchtime newsletter covering the latest headlines every day.
We also send coronavirus updates at 5pm on weekdays, and a round up of the week's must-read stories on Sunday afternoons.
Signing up is simple, easy and free.
You can pop your email address into the sign up box above, hit Subscribe and we'll do the rest.
Alternatively, you can sign up and check out the rest of our newsletters here.
“I’m really well
and I feel very fortunate that I’m still here.
I’ve lost three friends to brain tumours, but I’m staying positive, and I’m determined to beat this.”
Brain tumours kill more children and adults under the age of 40 than any other cancer.
Yet historically, just 1% of the national spend on cancer research has been allocated to this devastating disease.
Brain Tumour Research funds sustainable research at dedicated centres in the UK.
It also campaigns for the Government and the larger cancer charities to invest more in research into brain tumours in order to speed up new treatments for patients and, ultimately, to find a cure.
Matthew Price, community development manager at Brain Tumour Research said: “It’s fantastic to hear Suzanne is doing so well.
Sadly, this is not the case for many brain tumour patients, especially those with GBM.
On average, just 12% of brain tumour patients survive for five years or more post-diagnosis.
“We hope to have more success stories like Suzanne’s but, in order for that to happen, the national investment for research into brain tumours needs to increase to £35 million a year by 2025.”
To donate to Suzanne's fund, please click here.
Don't miss the latest news from around Scotland and beyond - Sign up to our daily newsletter here .
READ NEXT:
The perimenopause is the time during which your body makes the natural transition to menopause, marking the beginning of the end of your reproductive years.
As we move away from our fertile years, our ovaries reduce the output of the sex hormones oestrogen and progesterone, explains Sarah Williamson, nutritional therapist and co-founder of the new hyper-personalised, evidence-based menopause support company WomenWise.
"During this transition, our adrenal glands should begin to pick up the slack producing background levels of sex hormones, but for many modern women – because of stress-filled lives – the adrenals are not able to perform this role effectively."
As a result, from our early 40s, and sometimes earlier, we notice subtle symptoms of the perimenopause that begin to impact how we look, feel and live – even though it may be another 10-to-15 years before the menopause fully sets in.
As well as irregular cycles during this time you might also experience heavier periods, plus increased breast tenderness, weight gain, bloating and constipation.
Other physical effects include skin rashes and itchiness, an increase in allergies, joint aches and pains, fatigue, insomnia and decreased libido.
Naturally, this all plays into our mental and emotional wellbeing.
"The perimenopause can have a negative effect on our emotions, which is rarely talked about, but for many women is the most bothersome," says Williamson.
"These include angry or tearful outbursts, intense food cravings, increased anxiety, feelings of overwhelm, brain fog, forgetfulness and problems focusing."
Therefore it's common to feel less sociable, low in mood, and stressed.
Below, Williamson and other experts explain how, as our fertility fades and sex hormones change, we can be affected both physically and mentally by the perimenopause.
Changes to your weight
A key physical symptom of the perimenopause is weight gain, caused by changes in oestrogen levels altering our metabolism in a way that makes processed foods, such as those containing sugar and flour, more likely to be stored as fat.
Williamson explains: "Cravings for quick-fix foods such as biscuits, cakes, chocolate, pastries, crisps, pasta, and bread can leave you with fluctuating energy levels and hamper your methods for weight management, making them more difficult to stick to and less effective.
"
Her advice?
"Reduce foods high in flour or sugar to prevent them being stored as fat.
Instead, add more nutrient-dense foods such as eggs, fish, meat, organic dairy, vegetables, and fruit to your dishes and eat a palm-sized portion of protein at every meal to help regulate appetite and reduce cravings.
Also, avoid snacking to allow your body to adapt to using body fat as fuel and stick to three meals a day.
"
Even if you enjoy a healthy diet, weight gain can also be triggered by thyroid issues presenting during the perimenopause.
"Our thyroid gland regulates our metabolic rate, and progesterone plays a role in supporting thyroid hormones," she explains.
"As progesterone levels drop, many women begin to struggle with low thyroid symptoms such as weight gain and puffiness as well as hair loss, sensitivity to cold, deep fatigue, and muscle cramps."
If any of these sound familiar it's time to get your thyroid checked by the GP, she says.
Changes to your physical fitness
Claire Finlay, owner of Transition Zone and Resilience Zone, and fitness expert for WomenWise, explains that you may begin to notice that the exercise programmes you have followed in your 20s, 30s and early 40s no longer deliver the same results.
"During the perimenopause you might have to adapt your fitness routine to find a programme that works for your body and the symptoms you are experiencing."
This is because the perimenopause may present a number of factors that will alter your physical fitness, as well as your inclination to exercise.
As explained more below, "changing hormone levels can cause night sweats, which often leads to interrupted sleep," Finlay notes, "so you will feel more tired and less keen to exercise".
On days when this is the case she advises LISS (Low Intensity Steady State) exercises and walking as much as you can; "all activity counts – gardening, housework, walking up and down stairs".
In addition to the factors above, "weight gain during the menopause is often associated with becoming more sedentary," she says.
Additionally, dropping oestrogen levels can also result in aches and pains in the joints making it less appealing to move more.
A further factor affecting motivation is that "falling oestrogen and progesterone levels can cause low mood and feelings of depression, which is another culprit that can hinder your good intentions to exercise."
But remember, "exercise releases endorphins, which will make you feel happier and more positive" and it may become more important than ever.
"The hormonal changes that occur during menopause can bring increased cardiovascular risk in the form of higher blood pressure and cholesterol levels," Finlay adds, noting that maintaining cardiovascular activity can help combat this.
Related Story Why movement health trumps all wellness trends
Changes to your sleep
Clinical psychologist and sleep expert, and co-founder of the Good Sleep, Dr Maja Schaedel, tells us that sleep issues are a common difficulty reported during the perimenopause, with insomnia being one of the most problematic.
"This is characterised by a difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep," she explains, "in particular, waking up during the night and not being able to return to sleep is reported by 40–60 per cent of peri- and postmenopausal women".
The exact causes of this increase in sleep disruption are uncertain, although it's believed that hormonal changes play a role, specifically the decline in oestrogen experienced through the transition.
"Sleep can also be disrupted due to changes in body temperature caused by vasomotor changes (hot flushes), which trigger awakening during the night" – as noted above.
Given that the perimenopause is also associated with other psychological challenges, with women experiencing heightened anxiety and low mood, these can get in the way of sleep for obvious reasons, as well as "interacting with other symptoms such as changes in body temperature, which can make sleep much harder".
Dr Schaedel also confirms that "during the menopause transition more women suffer from other sleep difficulties such as the sleep breathing disorder sleep apneoa, and restless leg syndrome – both of which disrupt sleep, causing repeated wake-ups throughout the night".
As she says, this combination of difficulties during the perimenopause illustrates that it's important to fully understand all of the factors that might be having an impact on one's sleep in order to address them.
"For example, a drop in oestrogen could lead to disrupted body temperature throughout the night, which may lead to a poor night of sleep.
This could then lead to a set of anxious thoughts and feelings about coping the following day, which could then lead to increased anxiety and low mood, which then makes it harder to fall asleep the following night.
"
Changes to your skin
If you’re in the perimenopause it’s likely you’re feeling a little confused about your skin’s behaviour, noticing that it's more dry – possibly flaky – and sensitive, even if it's been neither of these things before.
"One of the key aspects of the menopause is that when your oestrogen drops, your skin becomes more sensitive," says Dr Emma Wedgeworth, consultant dermatologist for La Roche-Posay.
"You lose glucosamine and glycans, the water-holding molecules, and your skin barrier starts to become more sensitive."
She advises stripping your routine right back to a gentle cleanser and a rich moisturiser.
Then, you can start addressing the changes in your skin.
As the perimenopause continues, you will start to notice the development of fine lines, she says, as well as decreased bounce and spring in the skin "because your collagen levels drop".
This is a perfect time to start using retinol: "add one into your routine a couple of nights per week, slowly building up your usage," Dr Wedgeworth advises.
For more information on how the menopause affects your skin, and how to manage these changes, see our guide here:
Related Story How to menopause-proof your skin
Changes to your sex life
With the decline of oestrogen and testosterone comes reduced blood flow to the pelvic area, Dr Angela Sharma – GP, menopause specialist, clinical sexologist and co-founder of Spiced Pear Health – tells us.
This can impact your sex life, along with the other perimenopause symptoms noted above, "such as hot flushes, poor sleep and weight gain".
Those aside, "it’s also common for women to experience symptoms such as vaginal dryness and pain during sex, as the lack of hormones cause the vaginal and vulval tissues to become thinner, less stretchy and less lubricated, " Dr Sharma explains.
"The bladder and pelvic floor can also be impacted by low oestrogen and lead to recurrent urine infections, leaking urine and prolapses."
Low libido is another symptom, "and women can find it much harder to get aroused and are less able to respond to sexual touch or have subdued orgasms due to the reduced hormones and blood flow impacting the sensory nerves in this area".
In line with some other perimenopausal symptoms already noted, "other health issues such as decreased mobility, aches and pains may impact our ability to have sex, and some medications such as antidepressants may further reduce your libido and sexual response".
All of these factors combined can be hugely disruptive to a healthy sex life.
It’s a sensitive subject and can be easily missed, as women – and their doctors – might be reluctant to raise it.
But Dr Sharma says here are a lot of aids that can help "such as vaginal lubricants, vaginal moisturisers, vaginal oestrogen, HRT as well as testosterone therapy, and pelvic floor exercises which improve blood flow".
She also suggests "considering psychosexual therapy either individually or as a couple to improve communication and deal with other issues that may be contributing to disrupting your sex life" – so don’t give up.
The first step after experiencing any of these symptoms is to see your GP to request hormonal testing.
Be aware that the UK’s clinical guidelines stipulate that after women have reached the menopause (defined as going 12 months without a period), testing is no longer required, so seeking medical help during this interim stage is crucial for accessing treatment.
The gold standard is to take blood tests on day 19 of your cycle to measure progesterone levels; more detailed still is the 28-day Dutch urine test, which gives a good picture of your hormonal patterns throughout the month, though this is not yet available on the NHS.
Private support service are also available like WomanWise, which combines at-home tests (blood, DNA, urine) with an online questionnaire to inform a bespoke plan, provided alongside support, advice and information for £599.
Edwina Bartholomew has opened up on an unusual symptom she has experienced since giving birth to her baby boy, Thomas.
The popular Sunrise presenter, who gave birth to Thomas on March 1, is suffering from an unexpectedly persistent and nagging pain.
In the video above, Edwina Bartholomew’s last day before maternity leave
Stream Sunrise free on 7plus
She took to Instagram, asking her fans and followers if they had ever experienced something similar.
“Has anyone ever had a post-partum toothache?”
she captioned a photo which shows her wincing in pain.
“Went to the dentist thinking it was a filling.
“Nothing on X-ray.
“Now I’m convinced it’s tension in my jaw and shoulders (causing the toothache).
“Is that a thing?!”
In the photo Edwina has placed a “warming eye mask” along her jaw in an attempt to help with the tooth pain.
“This is supposed to be a warming eye mask and is helping somewhat,” she wrote, adding a smiling tooth emoji.
Edwina Bartholomew is suffering from a post-partum toothache.
Credit: Instagram/Edwina Bartholomew
In a separate post, Edwina showed an adorable picture of baby Thomas with her older daughter, Molly.
The siblings are on the floor, surrounded by books, with Edwina captioning the picture: “Book club.”
The sweet photo of her children enjoying some bonding time attracted comments from some well-known friends and colleagues.
“So tiny!
Forget how little they are in the early days!,” Seven presenter Kendall Gilding wrote.
“Just precious!
Hope you’re keeping well!”
“MELT,” Jodie Speers wrote, while Matt Shirvington added” “Too cute.”
Edwina’s feet can be seen in the bottom left-hand corner of the picture, with her toenails painted bright red.
That prompted one follower to make an observation.
“I’m just impressed that you’ve had a pedi!”
they wrote.
“Don’t zoom in too close,” Edwina responded.
“This was weeks ago and is barely holding up!”
Some lung tumours make hormone-like chemicals, said WebMD.
The health site added: “One of them pushes more blood and fluid to the tissues in your fingertips, so they look thicker or larger than usual.
“The skin next to your nails may seem shiny, or your nails may curve more than usual when you look at them from the side.
“It's not common, but finger clubbing is strongly linked to lung cancer: Around 80 percent of people who have it also have the disease.”
READ MORE: Type 2 diabetes: Three signs of high blood sugar that can lead to 'irreversible damage'
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a debilitating inflammatory autoimmune disease that affects the central nervous system (CNS).
While sufferers can experience long periods of remission where common symptoms such as motor control and fatigue can subside as MS lays dormant, increasingly damaged nerves can make the relapses more frequent and severe.
While a lot of treatment for MS is lifestyle-based, or cortisone to suppress the inflammation that causes debilitating flare-ups, there has been limited successful research in cell therapy, and so far there are no therapeutics that promote repair of the damaged nerves.
German researchers out of the Department of Neurology with Clinical Neurophysiology and the Institute of Clinical Biochemistry at the Hannover Medical School (MHH) have instead turned their attention to repairing the sheaths around these nerves by amping up a mechanism regulated by a naturally occurring sugar compound.
In MS flare-ups, rogue immune cells, in response to signals from the brain’s microglial cells, destroy protective myelin sheaths around the nerves, damaging them.
A naturally occurring sugar – polysialic acid – plays an important role on activating microglia.
The researchers discovered that if they manipulated the microglia cells with added polysialic acid, the cells could switch from being inflammatory to anti-inflammatory, allowing for those nerve sheaths to repair.
"The microglia has an immune receptor called Siglec-E that recognizes polysialic acid," said biochemist Hauke Thiesler from MHH).
"The microglial cells are the key cells that do the work directly on site and which we want to guide in a certain direction, so to speak, with the help of polysialic acid and thereby program them for healing.”
The aim is to create an environment that allows those myelin sheaths and nerve cells to repair, alleviating MS sufferers of the many brain and spinal cord dysfunctions associated with the autoimmune disease.
“Those affected are usually 20 to 40 years old when clinical symptoms of MS first appear," said Lara-Jasmin Schröder from the Department of Neurology with Clinical Neurophysiology.
Because of this, the researchers say it leaves a big window for treatments that could encourage self-healing to potentially keep MS in remission almost indefinitely.
While preliminary and with results based on a mouse model, the researchers are confident that their significant results can translate to human studies.
"The advantage is that the Siglec-E receptor in the brain actually only sits on the microglia cells, and the polysialic acid can therefore intervene there in a very targeted way," said Thiesler.
There’s also potential to look at other neurodegenerative diseases, given that this therapy acts on a mechanism that turns inflammation to an anti-inflammatory repair zone.
The research was published in the journal Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience.
Source: Hannover Medical School
COVID-19 (also called coronavirus) is an infectious disease.
People with COVID-19 usually have respiratory symptoms similar to a cold or flu.
While most recover completely, some people experience serious and life-threatening symptoms.
UC Davis offers the latest treatments for COVID-19.
Our Post-COVID-19 Clinic also treats people who have symptoms more than 30 days after their initial illness, known as long COVID.
Statement Highlights:
Diagnosing a transient ischemic attack (TIA), sometimes called a “warning stroke,” is challenging because symptoms often disappear within an hour.
A new American Heart Association scientific statement describes how to assess patients who experience a TIA, with specific guidance for health care professionals in rural areas.
Nearly one in five people who have a suspected TIA will have a full-blown stroke within three months, and two in five, given the appropriate scan, will learn they have actually had a stroke instead of a TIA.
Comprehensive evaluation of suspected TIA patients with imaging and use of risk assessment scoring may help determine which patients should be hospitalized because they are at the highest risk for a full-blown stroke.
Embargoed until 4 a.m. CT / 5 a.m. ET Thursday, January 19, 2023
DALLAS, January.
19, 2023 — Stroke symptoms that disappear in under an hour, known as a transient ischemic attack (TIA), need emergency assessment to help prevent a full-blown stroke, according to a new American Heart Association scientific statement published today in the Association’s journal Stroke.
The statement offers a standardized approach to evaluating people with suspected TIA, with guidance specifically for hospitals in rural areas that may not have access to advanced imaging or an on-site neurologist.
TIA is a temporary blockage of blood flow to the brain.
Each year, about 240,000 people in the U.S. experience a TIA, although this estimate may represent underreporting of TIA because symptoms tend to go away within an hour.
While the TIA itself doesn’t cause permanent damage, nearly 1 in 5 of those who have a TIA will have a full-blown stroke within three months after the TIA, almost half of which will happen within two days.
For this reason, a TIA is more accurately described as a warning stroke rather than a “mini-stroke,” as it’s often called.
TIA symptoms are the same as stroke symptoms, only temporary.
They begin suddenly and may have any or all of these characteristics:
Symptoms begin strong then fade;
Symptoms typically last less than an hour;
Facial droop;
Weakness on one side of the body;
Numbness on one side of the body;
Trouble finding the right words/slurred speech; or
Dizziness, vision loss or trouble walking.
The F.A.S.T. acronym for stroke symptoms can be used to identify a TIA: F ― Face drooping or numbness; A ― Arm weakness; S ― Speech difficulty; T ― Time to call 9-1-1, even if the symptoms go away.
“Confidently diagnosing a TIA is difficult since most patients are back to normal function by the time they arrive at the emergency room,” said Hardik P. Amin, M.D., chair of the scientific statement writing committee and associate professor of neurology and medical stroke director at Yale New Haven Hospital, St. Raphael Campus in New Haven, Connecticut.
“There also is variability across the country in the workup that TIA patients may receive.
This may be due to geographic factors, limited resources at health care centers or varying levels of comfort and experience among medical professionals.”
For example, Amin said, “Someone with a TIA who goes to an emergency room with limited resources may not get the same evaluation that they would at a certified stroke center.
This statement was written with those emergency room physicians or internists in mind – professionals in resource-limited areas who may not have immediate access to a vascular neurologist and must make challenging evaluation and treatment decisions.”
The statement also includes guidance to help health care professionals tell the difference between a TIA and a “TIA mimic” – a condition that shares some signs with TIA but is due to other medical conditions such as low blood sugar, a seizure or a migraine.
Symptoms of a TIA mimic tend to spread to other parts of the body and build in intensity over time.
Who is at risk for a TIA?
People with cardiovascular risk factors, such as high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, high cholesterol and smoking, are at high risk for stroke and TIA.
Other conditions that increase risk of a TIA include peripheral artery disease, atrial fibrillation, obstructive sleep apnea and coronary artery disease.
In addition, a person who has had a prior stroke is at high risk for TIA.
Which tests come first once in the emergency room?
After assessing for symptoms and medical history, imaging of the blood vessels in the head and neck is an important first assessment.
A non-contrast head CT should be done initially in the emergency department to rule out intracerebral hemorrhage and TIA mimics.
CT angiography may be done as well to look for signs of narrowing in the arteries leading to the brain.
Nearly half of people with TIA symptoms have narrowing of the large arteries that lead to the brain.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan is the preferred way to rule out brain injury (i.e., a stroke), ideally done within 24 hours of when symptoms began.
About 40% of patients presenting in the ER with TIA symptoms will actually be diagnosed with a stroke based on MRI results.
Some emergency rooms may not have access to an MRI scanner, and they may admit the patient to the hospital for MRI or transfer them to a center with rapid access to one.
Blood work should be completed in the emergency department to rule out other conditions that may cause TIA-like symptoms, such as low blood sugar or infection, and to check for cardiovascular risk factors like diabetes and high cholesterol.
Once TIA is diagnosed, a cardiac work-up is advised due to the potential for heart-related factors to cause a TIA.
Ideally, this assessment is done in the emergency department, however, it could be coordinated as a follow-up visit with the appropriate specialist, preferably within a week of having a TIA.
An electrocardiogram to assess heart rhythm is suggested to screen for atrial fibrillation, which is detected in up to 7% of people with a stroke or TIA.
The American Heart Association recommends that long-term heart monitoring within six months of a TIA is reasonable if the initial evaluation suggests a heart rhythm-related issue as the cause of a TIA or stroke.
Early neurology consultation, either in-person or via telemedicine, is associated with lower death rates after a TIA.
If consultation isn’t possible during the emergency visit, the statement suggests following up with a neurologist ideally within 48 hours but not longer than one week after a TIA, given the high risk of stroke in the days after a TIA.
The statement cites research that about 43% of people who had an ischemic stroke (caused by a blood clot) had a TIA within the week before their stroke.
Assessing stroke risk after TIA
A rapid way to assess a patient’s risk of future stroke after TIA is the 7-point ABCD2 score, which stratifies patients into low, medium and high risk based on A ge, B lood pressure, C linical features (symptoms), D uration of symptoms (less than or greater than 60 minutes) and D iabetes.
A score of 0-3 indicates low risk, 4-5 is moderate risk and 6-7 is high risk.
Patients with moderate to high ABCD2 scores may be considered for hospitalization.
Collaboration among emergency room professionals, neurologists and primary care professionals is critical to ensure the patient receives a comprehensive evaluation and a well-communicated outpatient plan for future stroke prevention at discharge.
“Incorporating these steps for people with suspected TIA may help identify which patients would benefit from hospital admission, versus those who might be safely discharged from the emergency room with close follow-up,” Amin said.
“This guidance empowers physicians at both rural and urban academic settings with information to help reduce the risk of future stroke.”
This scientific statement was prepared by the volunteer writing group on behalf of the American Heart Association’s Emergency Neurovascular Care Committee of the Stroke Council and the Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease.
The American Academy of Neurology affirms the value of this statement as an educational tool for neurologists, and it is endorsed by the American Association of Neurological Surgeons/Congress of Neurological Surgeons (AANS/CNS).
American Heart Association scientific statements promote greater awareness about cardiovascular diseases and stroke issues and help facilitate informed health care decisions.
Scientific statements outline what is currently known about a topic and what areas need additional research.
While scientific statements inform the development of guidelines, they do not make treatment recommendations.
American Heart Association guidelines provide the Association’s official clinical practice recommendations.
Co-authors are Vice Chair Tracy E. Madsen, M.D., Ph.D.; Dawn M. Bravata, M.D.; Charles R. Wira, M.D.; S. Claiborne Johnston, M.D., Ph.D.; Susan Ashcraft, D.N.P.; Tamika Marquitta Burrus, M.D.; Peter David Panagos, M.D.; Max Wintermark, M.D., M.A.S.; and Charles Esenwa, M.D., M.S.
The Association receives funding primarily from individuals.
Foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific Association programs and events.
The Association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content.
Revenues from pharmaceutical and biotech companies, device manufacturers and health insurance providers, and the Association’s overall financial information are available here.
Additional Resources:
About the American Heart Association
The American Heart Association is a relentless force for a world of longer, healthier lives.
We are dedicated to ensuring equitable health in all communities.
Through collaboration with numerous organizations, and powered by millions of volunteers, we fund innovative research, advocate for the public’s health and share lifesaving resources.
The Dallas-based organization has been a leading source of health information for nearly a century.
Connect with us on heart.org, Facebook, Twitter or by calling 1-800-AHA-USA1.
###
For Media Inquiries: 214-706-1173
Maggie Francis: 214-706-1382; Maggie.Francis@heart.org
For Public Inquiries: 1-800-AHA-USA1 (242-8721)
heart.org and stroke.org
Klaus Vedfelt / Getty Images
Widely known simply as ADHD, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is one of the most common neurodevelopmental disorders affecting both children and adults.
In fact, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) estimates that 8.4% of children and 2.5% of adults have been diagnosed with ADHD.
There are still many others who have not been diagnosed.
Though it may sound a bit untraditional, research tells us that when movies depict various human emotions and experiences, it can positively impact viewers and help us make more sense of our own struggles.
Movies can even help ignite important discussions and help us break free from some of the “taboo” sentiment around mental health issues.
Ahead, you’ll find four movies that depict characters with ADHD.
These range from kid-friendly cartoons that can inspire dialogue about ADHD with your own child, as well as documentaries that shed light on the topic.
Brain Tumor Patient Becomes Symptom Free After Receiving Chemotherapy Plus CBD Therapy
There are instances when chemotherapy may not be required, but it is uncommon.
Chemotherapy may not be advised if the tumour stage is very early, with minimal symptoms.
Another reason for not advising chemotherapy is if the patient's general condition is unfit to tolerate chemotherapy.
Management of glioblastoma using immunotherapy and cannabinoids.
An experts sheds lights on this combination treatment for brain tumors.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive brain tumor.
Also known as Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), it is believed to be the most common type of cancerous brain tumor among adults.
A new combination treatment using immunotherapy and cannabinoids is being touted to be an effective treatment for patients with brain tumors.
Here, an experts sheds lights on this new treatment for brain tumors.
"Whatever the cause of cancer might be, the disease is life impairing to say the least, wrecking havoc in the physical, emotional and financial status of the patient and family.
The physical problems, especially pain, can significantly affect the quality of life of a patient, leaving them helpless despite the routine treatments (surgery, chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy).
With changing times, the approach to treating diseases must also change.
Newer treatments must focus on not only curing the disease but also simultaneously managing the symptoms, thereby ensuring a higher quality of life throughout the trajectory of the disease," says Dr. Pradeep Mahajan, Regenerative Medicine Researcher, StemRx Bioscience Solutions Pvt. Ltd, Navi Mumbai.
Dr. Mahajan discusses one such less discussed approach to treat patients with brain tumors: Chemotherapy plus cannabinoids therapy.
Cannabinoids can reduce brain tumor cell growth
Explaining about this new treatment approach, Dr. Mahajan talks about a 68-year-old man who was diagnosed with glioblastoma and had undergone surgery for tumor removal.
The patient had developed a severe condition of the skin and mucosa as a side effect of one of the medicines given after surgery.
Therefore, subsequently he was only advised radiation therapy for the brain tumor.
Despite the treatments, he had a relapse and developed symptoms of headache, neck pain, irritability, weakness on one side of his body, etc.
He was told that further treatment was not possible, and that the tumor would only continue to cause severe problems.
You may like to read
Dr. Mahajan says, "Sometimes, we need to think out of the box.
It is devastating for a patient and the family when they are told nothing else can be done for the patient and that suffering is inevitable.
"
He continues, "We have heard that cannabinoids (CBD), which are a group of substances found in the Cannabis plant, are effective for managing pain, fits, certain muscle-related issues, etc.
These can be used judiciously in cancer cases as well.
Studies have shown that CBD can reduce brain tumor cell growth and disrupt blood supply to the tumor, in addition to addressing the symptoms of pain and thus the quality of life.
"
Chemotherapy plus CBD therapy: How it works
In context of the aforementioned patient, he underwent chemotherapy plus CBD therapy (oral spray form) along with hyperbaric oxygen therapy and physiotherapy rehabilitation.
The results of this combined protocol designed by Dr. Mahajan were extremely promising.
Not only did the patient achieve rapid relief from his symptoms (within 2 weeks), a reduction in the size of the tumor was also noted on the subsequent CT scan, suggesting a potential role for CBD in the treatment.
The patient was discharged in a stable condition with maintenance therapy as advised by the oncologist.
Two months have passed since the treatment and the patient remains symptom free.
He is continuing palliative chemotherapy and physiotherapy rehabilitation, and the results are encouraging.
TRENDING NOW
"This combination treatment was designed based on the properties of CBD best suited for tumor management, a good understanding of the tumor microenvironment (considering the role of oxygen), the choice of the chemotherapy drug to avoid any serious reaction in the patient, and ultimately physiotherapy rehabilitation.
We are following up with the patient and his oncologist regularly and are sure that the patient will be able to lead a good quality life, which otherwise he had lost hopes of," concludes Dr. Mahajan.
WASHINGTON:
The National Institutes of Health is beginning a handful of studies to test possible treatments for long Covid , an anxiously awaited step in U.S. efforts against the mysterious condition that afflicts millions.
Monday’s announcement from the NIH’s $1.15 billion RECOVER project comes amid frustration from patients who’ve struggled for months or even years with sometimes-disabling health problems — with no proven treatments and only a smattering of rigorous studies to test potential ones.
“This is a year or two late and smaller in scope than one would hope but nevertheless it’s a step in the right direction,” said Dr. Ziyad Al-Aly of Washington University in St. Louis, who isn’t involved with NIH’s project but whose own research highlighted long Covid’s toll.
Getting answers is critical, he added, because “there’s a lot of people out there exploiting patients’ vulnerability” with unproven therapies.
Scientists don’t yet know what causes long Covid, the catchall term for about 200 widely varying symptoms.
Between 10% and 30% of people are estimated to have experienced some form of long Covid after recovering from a coronavirus infection, a risk that has dropped somewhat since early in the pandemic.
“If I get 10 people, I get 10 answers of what long Covid really is," U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Xavier Becerra said.
That's why so far the RECOVER initiative has tracked 24,000 patients in observational studies to help define the most common and burdensome symptoms — findings that now are shaping multipronged treatment trials.
The first two will look at:— Whether taking up to 25 days of Pfizer's antiviral drug Paxlovid could ease long Covid, because of a theory that some live coronavirus, or its remnants, may hide in the body and trigger the disorder.
Normally Paxlovid is used when people first get Covid-19 and for just five days.
— Treatments for “brain fog” and other cognitive problems.
They include Posit Science Corp.’s BrainHQ cognitive training program, another called PASC-Cognitive Recovery by New York City’s Mount Sinai Health System, and a Soterix Medical device that electrically stimulates brain circuits.
Two additional studies will open in the coming months.
One will test treatments for sleep problems.
The other will target problems with the autonomic nervous system — which controls unconscious functions like breathing and heartbeat — including the disorder called POTS.A more controversial study of exercise intolerance and fatigue also is planned, with NIH seeking input from some patient groups worried that exercise may do more harm than good for certain long Covid sufferers.
The trials are enrolling 300 to 900 adult participants for now but have the potential to grow.
Unlike typical experiments that test one treatment at a time, these more flexible “platform studies” will let NIH add additional potential therapies on a rolling basis.
“We can rapidly pivot,” Dr. Amy Patterson with the NIH explained.
A failing treatment can be dropped without ending the entire trial and “if something promising comes on the horizon, we can plug it in.
”The flexibility could be key, according to Dr. Anthony Komaroff, a Harvard researcher who isn’t involved with the NIH program but has long studied a similarly mysterious disorder known as chronic fatigue syndrome or ME/CFS.
For example, he said, the Paxlovid study “makes all sorts of sense,” but if a 25-day dose shows only hints of working, researchers could extend the test to a longer course instead of starting from scratch.
Komaroff also said that he understands people's frustration over the wait for these treatment trials, but believes NIH appropriately waited “until some clues came in about the underlying biology," adding: “You’ve got to have targets.”
What should I look for?
"Low levels of vitamin B12 can be difficult to spot until it’s too late and you are dangerously lacking, and a surprisingly high percentage of people are deficient," warns Holland and Barrett.
In the United Kingdom, it is estimated that six percent of adults younger than 60 years have a vitamin B12 deficiency and that figure is close to 20 percent in those older than 60.
When your body is low in vitamin B12, it can show in a variety of ways, including:
Extreme fatigue
A lack of energy
Feeling weak
Sore and red
‘Foggy’ brain
Confusion
Problems with understanding, judgement and memory
Disturbed vision.
How to respond
See a GP if you're experiencing symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency, advises the NHS.
READ MORE: Vitamin B12 supplements: Three 'insidious' warning signs of a detrimental deficiency
Buy great deals for Vitamins, Minerals & Supplements on Amazon here
In a recent study posted to the medRxiv* preprint server, researchers assessed the prevalence of organ impairment in long coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) six months and a year post-COVID-19 at London and Oxford.
This news article was a review of a preliminary scientific report that had not undergone peer-review at the time of publication.
Since its initial publication, the scientific report has now been peer reviewed and accepted for publication in a Scientific Journal.
Links to the preliminary and peer-reviewed reports are available in the Sources section at the bottom of this article.
View Sources
Multi-organ impairment associated with long COVID-19 is a significant health burden.
Standardized multi-organ evaluation is deficient, especially in non-hospitalized patients.
Although the symptoms of long COVID-19, also known as post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC), are well-established, the natural history is poorly classified by symptoms, organ impairment, and function.
About the study
In the present prospective study, researchers assessed organ impairment in long COVID-19 patients six months and a year after the onset of early symptoms and correlated them to their clinical presentation.
The participants were recruited based on specialist referral or the response to advertisements in sites such as Mayo Clinic Healthcare, Perspectum, and Oxford from April 2020 to August 2021, based on their COVID-19 history.
The study was conducted on COVID-19 patients who recovered from the acute phase of the infection.
Their health status, symptoms, and organ impairment were assessed.
The symptoms assessed comprised cardiopulmonary, severe dyspnoea, and cognitive dysfunction.
Biochemical and physiological parameters were analyzed at baseline and post-organ impairment.
The radiological investigation comprised multi-organ magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed in the long COVID-19 patients and healthy controls.
Over a year, the team prospectively investigated the symptoms, organ impairment, and function, especially dyspnea, cognitive dysfunction, and health-related quality of life (HRQoL).
They also evaluated the association between organ impairment and clinical symptoms.
Patients with symptoms of active pulmonary infections (body temperature >37.8°C or ≥3 coughing episodes in a day) and hospital discharges in the previous week or > 4 months were excluded from the study.
Asymptomatic patients and those with MRI contraindications such as defibrillators, pacemakers, devices with metal implants, and claustrophobia were removed.
Participants with impaired organs, as diagnosed by blood investigations, incidental findings, or MRI, were included in the follow-up assessments.
Every visit comprised blood investigations, MRI scanning, and online questionnaire surveys, which were to be filled out beforehand.
In addition, a sensitivity analysis was performed that excluded patients at risk of metabolic disorders (including body mass index (BMI)
≥30 kg/m2, diabetes, and hypertension)
Results
Out of 536 participants, the majority were middle-aged (mean age 45 years), female (73%), White (89%), and healthcare workers (32%).
About 13% of the COVID-19 patients hospitalized during the acute phase of the infection completed the baseline evaluation.
A total of 331 patients (62%) had incidental findings, organ impairment, or reduction in the symptoms from the baseline at both the time points.
Cognitive dysfunction (50% and 38%), poor HRQoL (EuroQOL <0.7 in 55% and 45%), and severe dyspnea (36% and 30%) were observed at six months and one year, respectively.
On follow-up, the symptoms were reduced, especially cardiopulmonary and systemic symptoms, whereas fatigue, dyspnea, and cognitive dysfunction were consistently present.
The greatest impact on quality of life was related to pain and difficulties performing routine activities.
Almost every patient took time off work due to COVID-19.
The symptoms were largely associated with obese women, young age, and impairment of a single organ.
At baseline, fibrous inflammation was observed in the pancreas (9%), heart (9%), liver (11%), and kidney (15%).
Additionally, increased volumes of the spleen (8%), kidney (9%), and liver (7%) were observed.
Moreover, reduced lung capacity (2%), excess adipose deposits in pancreatic tissues (15%) and liver (25%) were observed.
High liver fibro-inflammation was associated with cognitive dysfunction at follow-up in 19% and 12% of patients with and without cognitive dysfunction, respectively.
Low liver fat was more likely in those without severe dyspnoea at both time points.
Increased liver volumes at follow-up were associated with lower HRQoL scores.
The prevalence of multi and single-organ impairment was 23% and 59% at baseline, respectively, and persisted in 27% and 59% of the participants on follow-up assessments.
Most of the organ impairments were mild.
However, they did not improve substantially between visits.
Notably, participants without organ impairment had the lowest symptom burden.
Most biochemical parameters were normal except creatinine kinase (8% and 13%), lactate dehydrogenase (16% and 22%), mean cell hemoglobin concentration (21% and 15%), and cholesterol (46% and 48%), at six months and a year post-COVID-19, respectively.
These biochemical markers increased from the baseline on follow-up assessments.
Conclusion
To summarize, organ impairment was detected in 59% of the patients at six months post-COVID-19 and persisted in 59% at one-year follow-up.
This has significant implications on the quality of life, symptoms, and long-term health of the patients.
These observations highlight the requirement for enhanced preventive measures and integrated patient care to decrease the long COVID-19 burden.
This news article was a review of a preliminary scientific report that had not undergone peer-review at the time of publication.
Since its initial publication, the scientific report has now been peer reviewed and accepted for publication in a Scientific Journal.
Links to the preliminary and peer-reviewed reports are available in the Sources section at the bottom of this article.
View Sources
Journal references: Preliminary scientific report.
Andrea Dennis, et al. 2022.
Multi-organ impairment and Long COVID: a 1-year prospective, longitudinal cohort study.
medRxiv. doi : https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.03.18.22272607 https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.03.18.22272607v1
Andrea Dennis, et al. 2022.
Multi-organ impairment and Long COVID: a 1-year prospective, longitudinal cohort study.
medRxiv.
: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.03.18.22272607 https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.03.18.22272607v1 Peer reviewed and published scientific report.
Dennis, Andrea, Daniel J Cuthbertson, Dan Wootton, Michael Crooks, Mark Gabbay, Nicole Eichert, Sofia Mouchti, et al. 2023.
“Multi-Organ Impairment and Long COVID:
A 1-Year Prospective, Longitudinal Cohort Study.”
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, February, 014107682311547.
https://doi.org/10.1177/01410768231154703, https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/01410768231154703.
EVANSVILLE, Ind. (WFIE) - Doctors are warning people to be vigilant for signs of heat-related illnesses during the extreme heat wave this week.
Deaconess Hospital’s Emergency Department Medical Director, Dr. Matthew Gilbert said the emergency department sees a lot of people who get heat stroke this time of year after going out to mow their lawns.
Dr. Gilbert said heat-related illnesses occur on a spectrum.
“It starts with heat exhaustion, so you start feeling a little lightheaded, a little dizzy,” said Dr. Gilbert.
“You might get some cramps.
That’s your warning sign you need to get out of the heat.”
When you start experiencing these milder symptoms of heat exhaustion, Dr. Gilbert said he recommends hydrating with lots of water and electrolytes and getting out of the heat.
However, he said experiencing more serious symptoms means you need to seek immediate medical attention.
“Once you start having seizures, altered mental status, really high temperatures, not sweating anymore, then you’re in heat stroke and need to call 911,” Dr. Gilbert said.
He said the most important part of staying healthy is taking breaks and knowing your personal limits.
Dr. Gilbert said some people in certain demographics are more likely to fall victim to the more serious symptoms of heat stroke.
“It seems like men tend to push themselves more, so they need to make sure they take it easy,” Dr. Gilbert said.
“And older people need to keep an eye out, because it will sneak up on them much faster than a younger person.”
Dr. Gilbert said he also recommends staying indoors when at all possible, during the hottest part of the day.
However, mother-of-four Brandi Mattingly, said sometimes that proves difficult especially during the summer holiday.
Mattingly said she does her best to make sure her family stays safe when they visit the playground in the heat.
‘We drink lots of water, or something with water in it.”
said Mattingly.
She also said she watches her kids to make sure they take periodic breaks during their playtime.
“A lot of times, they’re not even going to be thinking about it until it’s too late,” Mattingly said.
Still, Mattingly said she tries to stay creative in helping her kids stay safe as they enjoy their summer.
“We do lots of swimming, but if we can’t swim, I always have rags on hand to put on our necks or foreheads,” Mattingly said.
Dr. Gilbert says sometimes it’s the activities that you would not expect, like simply mowing your lawn, that could send you to the emergency room with heat stroke.
Copyright 2023 WFIE.
All rights reserved.
When you’re rubbing your itchy eyes and sneezing your way through an allergy flare-up, do you also feel muddled and fuzzy-headed sometimes?
Many allergy sufferers describe an experience known as “brain fog” — a hazy, tired feeling that makes it difficult to concentrate.
Advertisement Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center.
Advertising on our site helps support our mission.
We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What is this phenomenon and why does it happen?
According to allergist and immunologist Mark Aronica, MD, that disconnected feeling is fatigue, and it’s caused by the inflammation that results when your body tries to counteract your allergy symptoms.
“People with allergies experience inflammation,” he says.
“That inflammation leads to a congested nose, disrupted sleep patterns and not getting good rest.”
And, once the cycle starts, it’s often a downward spiral.
It seems like the more you rub your itchy eyes, the itchier they become!
It can feel next to impossible to go on with your daily routine.
The more fatigued you are, the more difficulty you’ll have performing well in school or work.
It can also negatively impact your quality of life if you’re too tired to do things you would normally do, like workout.
What’s really happening?
“Your body produces what’s called cytokines whenever you’re exposed to an allergen, such as tree pollen, grass or mold,” Dr. Aronica says.
Part of your body’s immune response, cytokines are proteins that help your body fight foreign substances.
“You also produce them when fighting infections caused by bacteria, viruses and colds,” says Dr. Aronica.
The cytokine release causes inflammation in your nose, leading to congestion and narrowed airways.
“Chronic inflammation from allergies can lead to that foggy feeling,” he says.
“And, you’ll end up not functioning well.”
Fighting the fog
If your allergies act up and you feel the fog rolling in, there are a few things you can do to stop the uncomfortable cycle of symptoms, inflammation and fatigue, Dr. Aronica says.
1. Limit your exposure.
“If you’re allergic to pollen or grasses, do your best to stay away from them,” Dr. Aronica says.
Stay indoors when they’re at their peak.
Keep your windows closed if you have air conditioning.
If you do spend time outside for longer periods, take a shower and change your clothes right away when you come in.
But it’s often not feasible or realistic to stay indoors all the time.
In that case, it’s important to take your medicine.
2. Take your medicine.
Medication can help curb your allergy symptoms.
Oral antihistamines — medications that prevent you from responding to the histamines that cause inflammation — are readily available over-the-counter.
“They’re a temporary solution, but they are often effective,” says Dr. Aronica.
Additionally, over-the-counter and prescription steroid nasal sprays can also help combat your allergy symptoms, Dr. Aronica says.
Advertisement
3.
Get allergy shots.
Allergy shots, or immunotherapy, is also an effective treatment.
Small injections of allergens under the skin can help your body build up an immunity over time.
The result is less frequent and less severe allergic rhinitis, Dr. Aronica says.
He adds that some allergy sufferers also find relief with nasal irrigation — a saline wash that cleans out the sinuses and nasal passages.
Many people administer this type of wash with a neti pot to clear out lingering allergy symptoms.
Just be sure to clean it after every use, given COVID-19 concerns.
Dr. Aronica notes that other conditions besides allergies may cause fatigue and brain fog.
If you have a sore throat, cough, fever or body aches, you could have a cold or other illness and should take medications that will combat those symptoms.
If you’ve been exposed to COVID-19 recently, contact your doctor.
To learn more about allergies from Dr. Aronica, listen to the Health Essentials podcast episode “Dealing with Spring and Summer Allergies.”
New episodes of the Health Essentials podcast publish every Wednesday.
watch now
LONDON — Symptoms associated with the Covid-19 omicron variant could be similar to those that normally accompany a cold, but experts are warning people that they should not underestimate the risks posed by the more transmissible strain.
One British study has now suggested that omicron infections could be associated with symptoms that make it easy to mistake it for an everyday illness like a cold.
The Zoe Covid Study, which analyzes thousands of Covid symptoms uploaded to an app by the British public, looked this week at symptoms associated with Covid cases in London that were recorded over two separate weeks in October and December, that is, before (as far as we know) and after omicron was spreading in the capital.
This initial analysis found similarities between the delta and the omicron variants, suggesting the latter hasn't mutated back into the more flu-like symptoms of previous Covid strains.
The team said that the top five symptoms reported in the Zoe app in those two different weeks were: Runny nose Headache Fatigue (either mild or severe)
Sneezing Sore throat London was selected for the Zoe analysis due to the higher prevalence of omicron compared with other regions.
The omicron variant is already the dominant strain in the capital and will soon account for nearly all infections in London and the wider U.K. Experts predict this phenomenon is likely to be repeated across other countries around the globe.
This time, with the omicron variant, cases could be harder to spot, however.
watch now
Professor Tim Spector, lead scientist on the Zoe Covid Study app, said there was a risk that potential omicron cases could well be mistaken for minor colds.
"As our latest data shows, omicron symptoms are predominantly cold symptoms, runny nose, headache, sore throat and sneezing, so people should stay at home as it might well be Covid," Spector said in Zoe's latest report Thursday.
"Hopefully people now recognise the cold-like symptoms which appear to be the predominant feature of omicron," he added.
Spector noted, as have other British experts on Covid, that omicron looks set to be the dominant strain in the U.K. by Christmas, with many people now questioning whether the U.K. could go into a lockdown in the new year.
"In the New Year cases could hit a peak higher than anything we've ever seen before," Spector noted, although he hoped there could be some reversal of a rise in cases in London as people are encouraged by Prime Minister Boris Johnson and leading health experts to curtail their social mixing, work from home and wear face masks.
What we know of omicron
It would be a big mistake to underestimate the risks posed by the omicron variant, despite some evidence that it causes milder symptoms more akin to a cold than flu.
Experts have judged omicron as being far more transmissible than the delta variant and believe it will soon become the dominant strain internationally.
Omicron's rise to prominence is remarkable given the fact it was only designated as a "variant of concern" by the World Health Organization on Nov. 26, two days after South Africa reported that it had detected it.
Early, small studies showed that while it was more virulent than the delta variant, it might cause less severe infections but that remains to be seen at a wider, real-world level with an infected person's age (younger people tend to experience milder Covid infections), general state of health and vaccination status (including when they were fully vaccinated as we know immunity wanes after six months) being factors in how an illness is experienced.
The South African doctor who first spotted the variant among her patients has said that the initial symptoms she saw in her own clinic were "extremely mild" but this was observational evidence from a small group of people.
Vaccine makers have said that the variant undermines the efficacy of a full course of Covid vaccination but that a booster shot helps to restore much of the shots' protection against severe infection, hospitalization and death.
Rising hospitalization
Experts are warning that a rise in hospitalizations is now inevitable given the increased transmissibility of omicron.
South Africa has seen an increase in hospitalizations (although the majority of admissions have been unvaccinated people) and the U.K. is experiencing a rise, too, with Johnson noting on Wednesday that the country was now seeing what he called "the inevitable increase in hospitalizations, up by 10% nationally week on week and up by almost a third in London."
To date, there have been just over 10,000 cases of omicron in the U.K., with numbers doubling every two days or less, and experts predict this is a vast understatement of the true number of omicron infections.
The first two confirmed U.K. cases of the variant were announced on Nov. 27 and they had links to travel to South Africa.
Although soon after, cases of community transmission were confirmed, meaning the variant was likely circulating earlier.
Omicron is making its presence felt in the U.K. with a surge in Covid cases prompting the government to race to get booster shots into people's arms.
On Wednesday, the U.K. reported its highest number of Covid cases since the pandemic began, with 78,610 new infections.
England's chief medical officer, Professor Chris Whitty, called on Wednesday for "serious caution" over hospitalization data, particularly in South Africa, that suggested omicron might cause a milder disease.
There, he said, immunity levels were different among the population due to a recent wave of delta infections.
He noted that more data was still needed on hospitalizations, severe disease and deaths but that "all the things that we do know [about omicron] are bad."
Dr. David Nabarro, the World Health Organization's special envoy on Covid-19, later told Sky News on Wednesday that there was a "very serious situation indeed" in the U.K. "The rise that you're seeing in the U.K. today is just the beginning of an extraordinary acceleration," he said.
Around one in five people may have obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), but most don’t realize their symptoms are signs of a problem.
According to a study published in ERJ Open Research, only a small proportion of those affected have been diagnosed and are receiving treatment.
The study included data on 20,151 French adults.
Researchers recorded how many participants had been diagnosed with OSA.
They also used a questionnaire to gauge how many participants might have undiagnosed OSA.
The questionnaire focuses on heavy snoring and excessive daytime sleepiness (the two most common OSA symptoms), high blood pressure, and obesity.
Researchers then used this data to calculate the proportion of the French population who are likely to be affected by OSA.
They found that around one in five (20.2%) were highly likely to have OSA while only 3.5% were being treated for the condition.
OSA was more common in men, in people who were older, had cardiovascular disease, lower socioeconomic status, were less physically active, were smokers, and in people with symptoms of depression.
Women were at a higher risk of going undiagnosed with OSA.
The study was led by Pauline Balagny, MD, from the faculty of medicine at the University of Paris-Cité, France.
“We know that OSA is a major health hazard, but if patients are diagnosed with the condition, they can be given treatments and advice to mitigate the risks,” says Balagny in a release.
“Our study suggests that OSA is common, but the majority of those affected do not know they have the condition.
Our findings are in line with research in other countries which suggest that OSA is becoming more common.”
A key strength of this research is that it is based on a large group of people who are representative of the French population.
A weakness is that the study relies on a questionnaire to gauge the likelihood of OSA, rather than testing participants in a sleep clinic.
Winfried Randerath, MD, head of the European Respiratory Society’s assembly on sleep-disordered breathing, who was not involved in the research, says in a release, “This research suggests that many people with OSA are not aware that their snoring and sleepiness are signs of a problem.
We need to raise awareness of OSA because once people are diagnosed, they can be given treatment and advice to help lower their risk of other serious conditions such as stroke, heart disease, and diabetes.
Although OSA is more common in men, this study indicates that we also need to get better at spotting the condition in women.”
Balagny and her colleagues will continue to study the links between OSA symptoms and cardiovascular diseases.
They are also investigating whether screening for OSA could help heart attack patients.
Photo 266078510 © Dmitrii Melnikov | Dreamstime.com
“I really believed that she was going to fight it off, that she was going to make a comeback,” Michele Franzese Rustigan said.
“And when that doesn’t happen, it’s super weird.”
What do CEOs make?
Much more than their Las Vegas workers
Michele Franzese Rustigan, left, pictured with sister Rosemarie Franzese, right, and family member Connie Sprauge, center.
Rosemarie Franzese, 70, died of COVID-19 at Sunrise Hospital and Medical Center on March 27 after a bout of symptoms that she and her sister did not associate with COVID.
(Michele Franzese Rustigan)
Michele Franzese Rustigan holds a photo of her sister, Rosemarie Franzese, who died at 70 years old from COVID-19 in late March, at her home in Boulder City, Monday, May 4, 2020.
Rosemarie didn't exhibit the usual symptoms of the virus and twice refused to go to the hospital before her condition worsened.
(Rachel Aston/Las Vegas Review-Journal) @rookie__rae
The Review-Journal wants to tell the stories of those who have died due to the coronavirus.
Help us by submitting names of friends or family , or email us at covidstories@reviewjournal.com.
Michele Franzese Rustigan told her big sister goodbye over the phone.
It was the afternoon of April 10, and Rosemarie Franzese was unconscious at Sunrise Hospital and Medical Center.
Hanging up, Rustigan, 67, was in shock.
But she also felt a wash of relief.
Yes, she wasn’t able to be with her sister — the two were extremely close — and yes, Franzese wasn’t awake.
But at least Rustigan was able to tell her that she loved her, and give her permission to go.
Then the light bulb went off.
“She was deaf,” Rustigan said with an ironic laugh.
“I didn’t even think of that.”
“But I think she heard me in her soul,” Rustigan continued, her voice starting to break.
“I have to believe that.”
Removed from a ventilator, Rosemarie Franzese died from the coronavirus about 10 minutes later.
“Ro,” as her sister called her, was 70.
“My sister is a fighter, and I really believed that she was going to fight it off, that she was going to make a comeback.
And when that doesn’t happen, it’s super weird,” Rustigan told the Las Vegas Review-Journal last week.
“I’m at her house right now — it’s only my third time being here since — and I still think she’s going to walk through the door.”
Strange symptoms
Rustigan has no idea how her sister got sick.
Franzese, who spent her mornings and afternoons safely shuffling Hal Smith Elementary School students across busy intersections as a school crossing guard, hadn’t worked in about a week, since schools were closed.
Outside of work, or the occasional grocery trip, the longtime former hairstylist and avid New York Yankees fan didn’t get out much.
“She was a good person living a very simple life, just getting by,” Rustigan said.
She thinks her sister fell ill around April 2.
It wasn’t shortness of breath, or tightening in the chest, or a dry cough, though, she said.
It was diarrhea — so severe that even the act of standing up would cause Franzese to soil her pants.
At night, she would also grow confused.
During a visit to her sister’s east Las Vegas home, for instance, Franzese began to trail off mid-conversation, unable to string three words together, Rustigan said.
Concerned, Rustigan called 911.
Paramedics determined Franzese was extremely dehydrated, but because Franzese was coherent enough to answer their questions and did not want to go to the hospital, they could not take her.
“I was really angry with her, because she kind of laughed and said, ‘I’m fine, I’m fine, I’m just a little dry.
My mouth is dry,’”
Rustigan said.
“I said, ‘You’re not fine.’
”
New research
Rustigan never considered it was COVID-19.
Her sister didn’t either.
Once more, two days later, a relative called 911 when Franzese seemed confused and disoriented, and once more, Franzese refused to go to the hospital.
About 3:45 a.m. on April 6, though, a relative called 911 a third time: Franzese was moaning and groaning in her sleep but would not wake up.
That time, she was unable to refuse paramedics, so an ambulance finally took her to Sunrise Hospital and Medical Center.
Upon arrival, she showed extremely low oxygen levels and was immediately put on a ventilator.
“What they saw, to them, must’ve been COVID all the way,” Rustigan said, noting her sister tested positive a day after being admitted to the hospital.
“But the symptoms I was hearing on the television?
It wasn’t any of those symptoms.”
According to an April study out of Stanford Medicine, it appears COVID-19 may sometimes present with gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhea.
The study was featured in Gastroenterology, a medical journal that focuses on gastrointenstinal disease, as part of a larger analysis that grouped together more than 100 similar studies, all of which found similar results.
Stanford fellow Alexander Podboy, a doctor and co-author of the Stanford study, said all Stanford patients who developed gastrointestinal symptoms either first had respiratory symptoms, or they developed respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms concurrently.
But that may have been a product of who was being tested at the time, Podboy said, since Stanford only studied positive patients, and the threshold for patient testing amid a national testing shortage still focuses on respiratory symptoms.
Podboy said the study does not mean anyone who has diarrhea may have COVID.
But the findings do make a case for the medical field to increase its threshold for COVID suspicion, and “make sure that we look globally at each patient for their entirety of symptoms.”
She had rallied
Franzese never regained consciousness.
At one point, she seemed to be rallying.
Then her lung collapsed.
With permission from Rustigan and their brother Vincent, hospital staff removed Franzese from the ventilator about five days after she was first admitted.
It all happened so fast.
“We were desperately trying to get her help, but it wasn’t working,” Rustigan said.
“I don’t want to think that if she had been treated earlier, she would have lived, but I do think that.”
Rustigan feels fortunate that no one else in her family got sick — not even Rustigan’s son and his girlfriend, who were living with “Ro.”
But even in a pandemic, when so many families are going through similar experiences, Rustigan also feels “very singled out.”
“I hate death in general, and the world goes on,” Rustigan said.
“But I do feel like the dead are just a number to the country and the world.”
Maybe that’s because, until it happens to you, you might be feeling safe, Rustigan said.
Separated, even.
Like she and her family did, until Franzese was put on a ventilator.
Now she feels resentment.
Anger.
“My kids are devastated.
My grandchildren are devastated,” she said.
“It’s just horrible.”
A previous version of this story said Rosemarie Franzese died March 27.
She died April 10.
Contact Rachel Crosby at rcrosby@reviewjournal.com or 702-477-3801.
Follow @rachelacrosby on Twitter.
Rosacea is commonly characterised by a pink or red colouring spread across the face.
It is an inflammatory skin condition that is extremely recognisable, as it can cause the skin to become uneven in colour and texture, and cause breakouts.
According to Bio-Kult’s nutritional therapist, Claire Barnes, there are natural ways to treat rosacea, including taking a certain supplement.
'The best' drink to lower your risk of blood clots - expert
Look after your gut
Even though rosacea only affects your face, it might flare up because of what is going on in the rest of your body – particularly, your gut, said Barnes.
“If you are someone who suffers from poor gut health and associated issues, such as leaky gut syndrome, I would recommend taking steps to improve your gut health.
This is since the way your gut functions can affect the severity of your rosacea symptoms and skin health in general.
“It is therefore important to consider whether your current lifestyle choices are affecting your gut health.
You may need to up the hours of sleep you get per night or reconsider the food and drink you consume for your gut health to improve, and as a result, your rosacea.
Switch up your diet
Paying attention to the food one consumes can also help treat rosacea naturally, said Barnes.
READ MORE: Menorrhagia is one of the most 'common signs' of cancer - 'Seek appointment with your GP'
Former Miss Universe Australia Olivia Molly Rogers has taken to social media to document her struggle since falling ill with COVID.
After spending her “first alcohol-free NYE” at home in isolation after her fiance Justin went down with the virus, Olivia updated her fans to say she’d been suffering too.
WATCH IN THE VIDEO ABOVE:
Omicron seems to cause milder symptoms
Stream the world's best reality, entertainment and true-crime shows free on 7plus
“The only positive of 2022 so far has been my covid test result,” the model wrote on Tuesday.
She said she’d gone through four days of symptoms which “hadn’t been much fun at all”.
Olivia Molly Rogers has taken to social media to document her struggle since falling ill with COVID.
Credit: Instagram/Olivia Molly Rogers
“I am doing my best to focus on the little things I can control & the silver linings of the situation - at least it’s now and not in 4 weeks when our wedding is!”
Olivia told her fans.
She said she was feeling grateful for her friends who had dropped off supplies.
“We’ve binged a lot of shows and movies over the past week.
I know we are very lucky to have access to all of these things,” she said.
But Olivia also said she’d been suffering a “random” symptom - burps.
“Sending love to anyone else with the spicy cough,” she wrote.
“I hope you don’t experience as many burps as I have.
The weirdest symptom for sure.”
Posting to her Instagram stories, Olivia clarified that the symptom was “kind of funny”.
“I can’t stop burping,” she wrote.
“I googled it and apparently it’s part of the gastrointestinal symptoms of COVID, not that common though.
“Has anyone else had this with COVID?”
According to the Department of Health, the most common COVID symptoms are:
fever
coughing
sore throat
shortness of breath
Other symptoms include:
runny nose or congestion
headache or fatigue
muscle or joint pains
nausea or loss of appetite
diarrhoea or vomiting
temporary loss of smell or altered sense of taste.
The Omicron variant has slightly different symptoms.
These are:
Cough
Fatigue
Runny nose and congestion
Night sweats
Less likely to have a loss of taste or smell
However, according to a report published in Medical News Today, belching is among a range of less common symptoms.
Many women in the U.S. aren't being treated for menopause symptoms by doctors.
(Illustration: Aisha Yousaf for Yahoo; photo: Getty Images)
Two years ago, 49-year-old Tina Mulryan, a New York City hair colorist, visited her primary care physician looking for answers.
For over a year she had been waking up several times at night, suffering from hot flashes and experiencing brain fog during the day.
Mulryan tells Yahoo Life she used to have plenty of energy but recently was feeling depleted.
“I’m just kind of really irritable because I’m tired,” she says, recalling how she felt.
“I want to take a nap in the middle of the day and that’s not me.
I’ve always had a ton of energy.”
Her doctor offered her Lexapro, an antidepressant.
“I said no, I’m not depressed,” she says.
Mulryan wanted answers about her symptoms — and didn’t get them.
“I was just like, you know what?
You’re not the doctor for me anymore.
And I just left.”
It turns out that Mulryan was experiencing perimenopausal symptoms.
“I felt frustrated,” she says about the lack of help she received from her physician.
"I felt let down by the medical community.”
Mulryan’s experience is not unique.
The majority of menopausal women in the U.S. aren't being treated for symptoms by doctors.
Tina Mulryan suffered from hot flashes and brain fog, but didn't feel supported by her physician.
(Photo courtesy of Tina Mulryan)
‘We’re not educating providers on menopause’
According to a recent study from Elektra Health, a digital platform that offers menopause-related education and support, only one in five women between the ages of 40 and 60 receive a menopause diagnosis, even though 80% of all women generally experience symptoms.
Dr. Stephanie Faubion, medical director for the North American Menopause Society and director of the Mayo Clinic Center for Women’s Health, tells Yahoo Life that the mentality among her colleagues is, “‘If I just ignore it, these women and this problem will go away.’”
But with menopause symptoms lasting on average seven to nine years, “we can't just pat women on the head, tell them it’s going to be fine and not to worry about these symptoms,” she says.
“We’re not educating providers on menopause management anymore,” she says.
Faubion is co-author of a 2019 study that found just 6% of residents said they felt comfortable managing menopause and more than a third said they were not prepared at all.
On average, they reported having about two hours of education about menopause in medical school — total.
Dr. Anna Barbieri, ob-gyn and founding physician of Elektra Health, tells Yahoo Life: “You’ve got a lack of education.
Lack of time as a resource.
And just the controversy surrounding treatments of menopause that are still so prevalent, and it’s like a perfect storm of why [doctors] don’t feel comfortable with it.”
Dr. Anna Barbieri, ob-gyn and founding physician of Elektra Health, says there's "a lack of education" about menopause in medical school.
(Photo courtesy of Dr. Anna Barbieri)
‘There’s nothing wrong with you — move on’
When Barbieri was finishing her residency at Mt. Sinai in 2003, she says she barely had any menopause training.
It turned out to be a blind spot for her in 2014 when, at 41, she began experiencing brain fog and forgetfulness.
“Being a busy ob-gyn with no real experience in the area of menopause, I took myself to a neurologist and had a brain MRI because I thought I had a brain tumor,” she tells Yahoo Life.
“Well, I didn’t have a brain tumor.
I was actually in early perimenopause, and it was really through my own search that I was able to find ways to feel better.”
Barbieri saw her experience as an opportunity to educate herself on the topic so she could better help her own patients.
She says that 80% of her patients now come to her because of menopause.
Most of them find her after not getting answers or help from their ob-gyn or primary care physicians, who often don’t know enough about menopause and how to treat it.
In some cases, she says women are being flat-out told “‘There’s nothing wrong with you — move on.’”
Adding to the challenge is the fact that few people — both patients and doctors — even talk about menopause.
That was the case for Gwen Harris, of Nashville, who, when she was 54, says menopause symptoms, including insomnia, chronic eye problems, hot flashes and anxiety, “descended” on her.
She was unsure who to turn to.
“I didn’t know anything.
It was not something my mom ever told me,” she tells Yahoo Life.
Harris says the doctors she went to “wanted to give me sleep medication and anxiety medications.”
Instead, she worked with a naturopath, who practices alternative medicine.
“I literally had to go on this journey myself because I felt very alone and frustrated,” she says.
In 2013, Harris organized a menopause support group that has grown to over 124,000 members — the largest of its kind on Facebook.
“Suffice it to say, I found out that I’m not alone,” she says.
One of the common threads in the support group is the feeling of frustration, says Harris.
“They went to their doctor and their doctor didn’t know what to do for them” is a typical refrain, she says.
Harris now co-runs a menopause support network called Menowave and says in the 10 years since she created the support group, she notices that the younger generations are talking more about menopause and “helping to break the taboo.”
Barbieri agrees that support groups are places of community to share stories about menopause, but cautions not to take medical advice from these groups, since treatment varies for each individual.
Gwen Harris, left, pictured with her co-founder of Menowace, Tina McDermott, says she felt "very alone" trying to navigate her menopause symptoms.
(Photo courtesy of Gwen Harris)
Why doctors hesitate to prescribe hormone therapy
One of the barriers to women getting treatment for menopause symptoms is the reluctance some doctors have to prescribe hormone replacement therapy (HRT).
That typically stems from the 2002 Women’s Health Initiative study, which reported that HRT causes an increased risk of heart disease, breast cancer and stroke, and had more risks than benefits.
However, researchers critiquing the studies have pointed out that “no distinction was made between users and their age.”
The study also used a kind of oral estrogen called Premarin on the women, which contains a mixture of multiple estrogens found in the urine of pregnant horses.
“We don’t typically use this type of hormone therapy anymore.
We mainly use estradiol today, which is what the ovary used to produce before menopause,” says Faubion.
It’s available in multiple forms, including skin patches, which doctors believe to be safer than taking estrogen orally because it bypasses the liver.
Before the report was released, Faubion says about 40% of postmenopausal women were using hormone therapy.
After the report was released, that number dropped to 6% and hasn’t changed.
“So it dropped by orders of magnitude and has not rebounded,” says Faubion.
“And it’s because providers and women are not educated and they’re afraid of it.”
Women need to educate themselves: ‘I found my voice’
Adding to the challenge is that many women don't even realize they’re in menopause — nor do the doctors they’re working with.
Faubion says she's seen many women come into her clinic with a slew of perimenopausal symptoms without realizing that’s what they’re experiencing.
“It was like, I’m sweating, I’m gaining weight, I’m losing hair, I have palpitations, I’m anxious.
And all of it, they’re thinking, ‘Oh my God, I’m dying.’
And I’m like looking at them going, ‘Oh my God, you’re in menopause.’”
But if a doctor isn’t tuned into menopausal symptoms, it can lead to a slew of unnecessary testing.
“Women are seeing a urologist for urinary frequency and maybe some incontinence.
They’re seeing a cardiologist for palpitations, they’re seeing a psychiatrist for mood changes,” says Faubion.
“And all of it is really just related to menopause.”
Barbieri says women can’t wait for the changes that need to happen for doctors to become educated about menopause management.
Instead, she encourages women self-educate and self-advocate.
That’s what Colorado resident Christen [last name withheld] had to do when she turned 46 and was dealing with numerous perimenopause symptoms.
“I thought I was terminally ill,” she recalls.
Her journey began when the first doctor she visited wanted to put her on Premarin, the conjugated equine estrogen.
She had learned about the possible side effects and instead asked her doctor for an estrogen patch.
He agreed.
“I did find in menopause that I found my voice,” Christen says.
“I learned I could be so clear and direct.
That it’s OK to say, ‘This is not enough for me.
This is what I want to do.
If you can’t help me, I’ll find it somewhere else.’”
Christen says she learned how to advocate for herself during menopause.
(Photo courtesy of Christen)
How to advocate for yourself
Think your symptoms might be related to menopause?
Barbieri suggests preparing for your doctor’s visit in specific ways so you can advocate for yourself.
Organize your symptoms.
Spend a few minutes identifying all of your symptoms and writing them down.
“In my practice, I will often spend a good hour with a new patient, but a lot of people don’t have that luxury of time with their doctor,” Barbieri says.
Instead of telling your doctor, “I just don’t feel myself,” knowing your specific symptoms — struggling to focus, waking up multiple times per night, hot flashes, etc. — helps.
Prepare what you’re going to say.
Barbieri advises saying to your doctor, “‘I think I’m having symptoms of perimenopause including…’” and list out your symptoms, adding: “‘Do you think that’s what it is?
Can these symptoms be attributed to something else and do we need to address that and rule those out?’”
Ask questions about how to manage symptoms.
Ask the doctor if they can help.
Barbieri says some doctors will be open about their lack of background and make a referral.
Another question to ask: Do I qualify for hormone therapy?
“If the provider says, ‘No, I think hormones are dangerous and nobody should be doing it,’” she says, then ask: “Why or why not?
What’s the data to support it?”
If the provider says yes, then ask, “What am I looking at in terms of risks and benefits?
What are some alternatives?
What is the next step?”
Barbieri cautions against any doctors with extreme responses or absolutes like “hormones are dangerous.”
She says the field is complex and requires a nuanced understanding of the individual patient.
For Faubion, she wants women to understand that “menopause is not a disease.
It’s a normal life transition that 100% of [women] are going to go through.”
But that doesn’t mean having to put up with symptoms or navigating treatment options on your own.
SYMPTOM CHECKER Covid symptoms or hay fever?
How to spot the difference as pollen season starts
POLLEN season is upon us and for many allergy sufferers that means itchy eyes and a sniffly nose.
But there are some symptoms of hay fever that can also overlap with Covid-19 - here's how you can spot the difference between the two.
🦠 Read our coronavirus live blog for the latest news & updates...
2
The main symptoms of Covid-19 are a new persistent cough, a high temperature or a loss of taste and smell (anosmia).
If you have any of these symptoms then you should get a test and isolate in order to stop the virus spreading.
Tree pollen season starts in late March and affects around 25 per cent of people.
Pollen from trees and shrubs can trigger hay fever, which is a type of allergy, sometimes called seasonal allergic rhinitis.
Hay fever occurs when your body makes the mistake of treating the tree pollen, or pollen from shrubs, as a harmful organism, and the immune system goes into action by making antibodies to try to prevent it spreading.
One in five Brits suffer from hay fever -
so that's a whole load of people who can expect to develop hay fever symptoms this week.
However, experts warn that, amidst the current pandemic, some people may mistake these signs for those of coronavirus.
2
It's important to recognise the difference between Covid-19 and hay fever symptoms Credit: Getty - Contributor
A cough is common in both people who have Covid and people who have hayfever.
If you have Covid the cough is a new persistent cough - if you have hayfever it's likely that your cough is tickly, dry, and mainly occurs when you are outside and exposed to allergens.
GP Dr Gordon Sinclair said it's important people understand the difference between symptoms.
He said: "We don’t want people to get unduly anxious about their hay fever.
However, we also want to make sure that they don’t go out and about, assuming they have their usual allergies, when they may actually have coronavirus and should stay at home.
"While the symptoms of coronavirus and hay fever can overlap, people with hay fever don’t experience a high temperature and most won’t feel unwell.
“Hay fever and allergy symptoms tend to be milder, for example, itchy eyes, sneezing and coughing.
Top tips to alleviate hay fever symptoms Mark Shelton, Optometrist and Clinical Development Coach at Bayfields Opticians and Audiologists gives his top tips on how to keep hay fever symptoms at bay Staying indoors between 10:30am and 3:30pm, and on windy and humid days, when pollen counts are at their highest · If you use contact lenses, daily disposable lenses can provide a protective barrier to pollen but reusable lenses are likely to make your symptoms worse over time · Avoiding alcohol, which is known to increase allergy symptoms · Using an air conditioning unit to filter the air in the buildings you’re using · Bathing your eyes regularly in cold water or using cooling eye masks ·
Removing hair, including a fringe, from your face – pollen gets trapped in hair and can reach the eye · Drying your clothes inside – materials also capture pollen, which then come into contact with your skin and can make their way to your eyes · Using face wipes that are designed to attract and remove pollen that may be on your face
"Symptoms may vary over the course of the day or depending on the weather, as the pollen count changes.
"They can also usually be controlled through antihistamines or nasal sprays.
"
He said that if you do have any new cough, fever, lose your sense of taste or smell, you must self-isolate as these could be signs of coronavirus.
Dr Sinclair said: "Most people can manage their symptoms at home with paracetamol and plenty of fluids.
"However, if you feel worse, you should use the NHS 111 checker – https://111.nhs.uk/covid-19/ or call NHS 111.
"
There are numerous ways to treat hayfever and sufferers can get over the counter medication such as antihistamines and nasal sprays.
While there is no cure for hayfever there are ways that you can quell the symptoms.
Mark Shelton, Optometrist and Clinical Development Coach at Bayfields Opticians and Audiologists said hayfever is most common in children and teenagers, and with spikes in pollen taking place during exam season, this important time of the year for young people can also be affected.
He added: “Hay fever is a particular nuisance to contact lens and glasses wearers as the surfaces build up a layer of pollen over time, which then goes on to affect our eyes.
"As such, it’s wise to take a preventative approach to hay fever, doing what you can to identify what causes your reactions and then keeping exposure to the allergen to a minimum.”
UAB endocrinology and fertility expert breaks down the basics of endometriosis, a common gynecologic condition affecting one in 10 women of reproductive age.
Richard Burney, M.D., director of the UAB Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
Photography:
Lexi Coon“What is endometriosis?” was digitally searched more than 31 million times in 2018.
While the disease affects an estimated 190 million women worldwide, many have not heard of the condition, let alone its symptoms.
Richard Burney, M.D., director of the University of Alabama at Birmingham’s Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, provides insight on endometriosis, symptoms and treatment options.
What is endometriosis?
Endometriosis is defined by the presence of endometrium, or uterine lining, in locations outside the uterus.
It is predominantly found in the lining of the pelvis, ovaries, intestine and bladder but can also be found in sites more distant to the uterus, such as abdominal incisions, the lungs and, in rare cases, the brain.
In normal menstrual cycles, the endometrium grows in thickness to support a potential pregnancy.
If pregnancy does not occur, the endometrial lining is shed via the cervix during the process of menstruation, commonly known as a period.
However, studies show 94 percent of women have lining that is shed into the pelvis, known as retrograde menstruation, during the time of the period.
Most of this blood and tissue is cleared by the immune system; but for some women, the tissue implants on surfaces and organs in the pelvis and becomes endometriosis.
The endometriosis lesions menstruate in response to cyclic hormones, resulting in pain and scarring in the pelvis.
Who is affected by endometriosis?
Endometriosis is a common gynecologic condition affecting one in 10 women of reproductive age and as many as one in three women with otherwise unexplained infertility.
For many women, the onset of endometriosis symptoms occurs during adolescence.
During the reproductive-age years, this condition can result in debilitating pain and/or infertility.
The ovarian form of the disease, known as an endometrioma, is particularly challenging from the fertility perspective.
The prevalence of endometriosis in menopausal women is very low, potentially due to a reduction in circulating estrogen.
UAB Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology has been ranked the No. 5 program in the nation by U.S. News & World Report.
What are the symptoms?
Endometriosis is a leading cause of chronic pelvic pain, particularly pain before and during menstruation, during intercourse, or during bowel movements.
Many women with endometriosis also note low back pain and headaches at certain times during the menstrual cycle.
It is also associated with vaginal spotting for two or more days, particularly in women with infertility.
Additionally, many adolescents, teens and young women suffer for years with painful periods.
Inability to conceive for a duration of 12 months in women with regular menstrual cycles or six months in women with irregular menstrual cycles is another indication to see a health care provider.
Are there different forms of endometriosis?
Three distinct forms of endometriosis are now recognized.
Peritoneal endometriosis describes the finding of lesions on the lining of the pelvis.
Ovarian endometriosis is when lesions shed within the ovary.
Deep infiltrating endometriosis occurs when lesions are in deeper layers of tissue or organs.
Endometriosis is also categorized by stages based on the extent of one’s condition.
Stage 1 is often considered minimal disease, typically lesions found in the lining of the pelvis, and more severe disease that affects ovaries and/or deep tissues are more often categorized as stage 4.
Burney cautions that the staging system does not necessarily correlate with pain levels.
How is endometriosis diagnosed?
Diagnosis of endometriosis is challenging due to the absence of a convenient laboratory test, which has resulted in a nearly seven- to 10-year delay from the onset of symptoms to definitive diagnosis.
Surgery, typically laparoscopy, provides not only a diagnosis, but also an opportunity to treat any lesions identified.
In the absence of a laboratory or surgical tests, endometriosis is suspected based on medical history and pelvic examination with pain mapping.
An imaging study such as a pelvic ultrasound can help identify ovarian endometriosis, and MRI has proved useful for the detection of deep infiltrating endometriosis.
What are treatment options for endometriosis?
Management of endometriosis is contingent on the goals and priorities of the patient.
It can also require multiple practitioners across a variety of specialties.
For patients prioritizing fertility, both laparoscopic surgery and/or fertility treatment are evidence-based approaches.
For those who are more interested in controlling endometriosis-associated pain, a two-step approach is recommended.
The first step is treatment of existing disease by ablating lesions, typically through surgery.
The second step is prevention of recurrence by reducing endometrium from entering the pelvis.
Additionally, ovarian endometriosis, which forms fluid-filled cysts, known as chocolate cysts, can transition into certain types of ovarian cancer.
It is important for women with chocolate cysts to have regular examinations.
For women with symptomatic chocolate cysts, surgical removal of the cyst can be considered.
The results presented demonstrate that patients with treatment resistant schizophrenia were less motivated than healthy controls when performing an EBDM task.
This behaviour was characterised by reduced incentivisation to reward and blunted aversion to effort (Fig. 2A, B).
Drift diffusion modelling of the choice and reaction time data (DDM) confirmed these findings while revealing the following groupwise differences (Fig. 7).
Patients needed to accumulate more evidence than healthy volunteers prior to initiating rewarded effortful decisions (increased a), and their rate of evidence accumulation was slower (reduced v 0 ).
This parameter was less responsive to changes in both reward and effort (reduced v r and less negative v e , respectively).
Despite this, they did not show an indiscriminate propensity, or bias (z), towards rejecting offers.
Within group analyses of clinical measures and behavioural parameters highlighted two further findings.
First, cognitive impairment was the single best predictor of reward insensitivity (Fig. 4A, B).
This was supported by both choice behaviour analysis as well as DDM, which incorporated reaction time data.
Second, negative symptom severity as defined by the EXP factor best explained blunted responsiveness to effort (Fig. 4A, C).
While this effect was demonstrated in choice behaviour, it was not present in the DDM analysis.
Several studies have shown a reduced responsiveness to high values of reward across the schizophrenic disease spectrum [23, 25, 26, 59].
This includes in first episode psychosis [59], established schizophrenia, or schizoaffective disorder [23, 25, 26].
Here we confirmed these findings in patients with TRS, demonstrating that there are common behavioural deficits across the schizophrenic spectrum.
Additionally, we showed that TRS is characterised by blunted responsiveness to high effort, with patients accepting significantly less offers than controls at low effort but not at high effort (Fig. 2B).
A plausible interpretation of this is that they display inefficient effort allocation during EBDM.
This finding is less commonly reported [59, 60] and may be a unique characteristic of TRS patients.
On the other hand, it is also possible that our task design which co-varies reward and effort across five levels is better able to detect this more subtle effect.
Some EBDM paradigms in schizophrenia commonly only vary five reward values across only two effort levels (easy vs hard)
[23, 25] and recent work has highlighted this as a possible limitation in understanding how reward and effort processing are individually affected in schizophrenia
[30].
Within our patient group we demonstrated that reward sensitivity was positively associated with cognitive impairment, while effort insensitivity correlated with negative symptom severity (as measured by blunted self-expression).
Notably, these two constructs were significantly associated with one another on questionnaire correlation (Supp.
Fig. 3).
So despite their association, they were characterised by unique behavioural deficits, suggesting that they may respond to different treatment strategies.
A similar divergence in behaviour was recently characterised by Cooper and colleagues
[30], who reanalysed EEfRT task data from two previously published studies [25, 27].
They were able to demonstrate that in 153 patients with schizophrenia pooled across two studies individuals unable to incorporate reward related information during EBDM were characterised by cognitive impairment, even after accounting for negative symptoms.
On the other hand, sub-group analysis demonstrated that some patients with motivational deficits were more effort averse
[30].
Our findings diverge from that study in that while they demonstrated an increase in effort aversion with increasing negative symptoms, we demonstrated the opposite effect.
Further, we showed that EXP, and not MAP, was associated with these changes.
There are several possible explanations for the differences in our studies.
First, Cooper et al. did not investigate associations between behavioural parameters and the EXP factor [30].
Rather, they investigated the MAP dimensions while accounting for total negative symptom scores [30].
It is not clear if the EXP factor would have demonstrated an association in their study.
Further, the association between amotivation and increased effort sensitivity was demonstrated in only half of their patients [30].
Thirdly, as they used pooled questionnaire data from previous studies, negative symptoms were measured using three different questionnaires.
Two of these, the scale for the assessment of negative symptoms [61] and the negative component of the PANSS
[56], were developed more than thirty years ago and do not reflect the current understanding of the negative syndrome
[10, 62].
Nevertheless, the authors were also able to demonstrate this association in a sub-group of their patients using a ‘next-generation’ negative symptom questionnaire known as the Clinical Assessment Interview for Negative Symptoms [30].
A recent comparison between this and the BNSS questionnaire, which we used, showed that while both demonstrated good psychometric properties, there was low to moderate convergence between the two questionnaires on motivation and pleasure questions [63].
It is possible therefore that the BNSS MAP factor was not able to detect this effect in our patient group.
More generally, the association between negative symptom severity and increased effort sensitivity is actually quite variable
[22,23,24,25,29, 52, 53, 57].
Indeed, several studies have failed to demonstrate this association at all [23, 24, 60] whereas others have only done so using categorical, not correlational approaches [26, 59].
These inconsistencies are possibly due to variations in task design, analytic approaches and questionnaires used to measure negative symptoms.
The association between inefficient effort allocation and negative symptoms might also be explained by these technical differences.
Nevertheless, this finding has also been previously described by two studies [59, 60].
In 48 patients with Schizophrenia, McCarthy and colleagues demonstrated that blunted self expression, indexed by alogia, was associated with inappropriate allocation of high effort regardless of reward value [60].
More recently, Chang et al. showed that this behavioural pattern was associated with increasing negative symptom severity, indexed by motivation and pleasure [59].
Taken together, our findings support the possibility that negative symptoms are not exclusively associated with increased effort aversion, but also with inefficient effort expenditure.
Additionally, they suggest that the EXP component of the negative syndrome may also play an important role in characterising behavioural deficits in patients with schizophrenia.
Nevertheless, the inconsistency across studies is important to note and steps towards resolving these will play an important role in clarifying exactly what kind of behavioural deficits characterise negative symptoms in schizophrenia.
Standardised questionnaires, task designs, and analytic approaches would all be useful to reduce variation between studies and improve interpretation.
An important consideration is whether our findings are applicable to TRS patients only or whether they also have implications for other schizophrenia sub-groups.
We propose that our results are of value to all patients with schizophrenia for several reasons.
First, we demonstrated for the first time that there are three distinct behavioural similarities between TRS and treatment responsive patients.
Specifically, TRS patients are less reward sensitive during effortful decision making when compared to controls [24,25,26], that this insensitivity is related to cognitive impairment
[30], and that there is a divergence between the behavioural correlates of cognitive dysfunction and negative symptom severity [30].
Clearly, this demonstrates significant overlap in the behavioural deficits between treatment resistant and responsive patients, suggesting there may be common treatment targets, for example for interventions that improve sensitivity to reward.
Where there has been a divergence has been in the relationship between negative symptom severity and effort sensitivity.
While recent work has suggested negative symptom severity is associated with increased effort aversion, we show that in TRS it is associated with inefficient effort allocation.
Could this be a TRS specific behavioural deficit?
If so, this could represent a valuable behavioural divergence between TRS and treatment responsive patients which can be utilised for both diagnostic and treatment development purposes.
This question might be answered by additionally including a treatment responsive group for comparison which was lacking.
This represents a limitation of this investigation which would be important to address in future work.
Other limitations include a modest sample size, which while similar to other EBDM studies in schizophrenia, may limit the ability to further explore the relationships between cognitive sub-domains and decision making.
Finally recent work in TRS has demonstrated that clozapine induced sedation may alter scores on negative symptom severity scales [64].
Specifically, improvements in motivation and pleasure may be underestimated due to medication induced sedation
[64].
This may account for some of the differences in correlation between negative symptoms and behaviour in TRS and may need to be accounted for in future investigations.
To conclude, patients with TRS demonstrate significant behavioural deficits compared to controls when undergoing an EBDM task.
Moreover, negative symptoms and cognitive dysfunction uniquely alter motivated behaviour in TRS, despite being positively associated with one another.
This suggests that these factors contribute uniquely to motivated behaviour and may respond differentially to individually tailored therapy.
The symptoms of glaucoma depend on the type and stage of the child’s condition.
Glaucoma can affect one eye or both.
Dr Vidya Chelerkar, Head, Glaucoma Department, PBMA’s HV Desai Eye Hospital (Orbis Partner Hospitals) says, “The most common symptoms of congenital/infantile glaucoma are excessive watering of eyes, light sensitivity, and a large cloudy cornea which can cause the iris to appear dull.”
“On the other hand, juvenile glaucoma tends to develop without any obvious symptoms, like adult glaucoma.
Patients with juvenile glaucoma often tend to have a family history.
On exam, the eye pressure will typically be elevated and there may be signs of optic nerve cupping.
If the eye pressure increases rapidly, there may be pain and discomfort.”
adds Dr. Chelerkar.
Some children may have non-specific symptoms like headache, watering eyes, or seeing a colored halo, which resemble other eye problems or medical conditions.
Parents and caregivers should look for these symptoms and get an early consultation with an ophthalmologist.
During the slog of yet another Covid wave, and mounting monkeypox anxieties, health officials reported a case of polio in a New York suburb in July — the first detected in the United States in nearly a decade.
State health officials said that polio was detected in an unvaccinated person in Rockland County, New York, and that the virus had been found in county wastewater samples in June, as well as in wastewater samples in two different locations in Orange County, New York, in June and July.
On Aug. 12, health officials announced that poliovirus had been detected in sewage samples in New York City, indicating that the virus is likely circulating there too.
On Sept. 9, Governor Kathy Hochul of New York declared a State Disaster Emergency in response to the spreading virus, and health officials urged that unvaccinated people, including children two months old and older, get immunized immediately.
In October, the New York State Department of Health announced that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had found poliovirus in 70 wastewater samples in the state, including a sample collected in Brooklyn and a small, adjacent part of Queens.
These occurrences, as well as reports that health officials in Britain had detected evidence of poliovirus in sewage samples in London, have reignited polio concerns.
However, experts said that people who are vaccinated against polio do not need to change their daily behaviors or panic about the disease.
Here’s what you need to know.
What is polio?
Polio, also known as poliomyelitis, is a sometimes disabling and life-threatening disease caused by the poliovirus.
The disease mainly affects infants and children under 5, but anyone who is unvaccinated can contract it.
Indianapolis Colts rookie quarterback Anthony Richardson exited Sunday’s win over the Houston Texans due to a concussion.
Richardson played four offensive drives during the first quarter before going into the locker room to be evaluated.
During the second quarter, Richardson was ruled out for the remainder of the game.
Head coach Shane Steichen said after the game that Richardson self-reported the concussion symptoms.
An offer for Colts fans For the best local Indianapolis news, sports, entertainment and culture coverage, subscribe to The Indianapolis Star.
$1 for 6 months
Shane Steichen said Anthony Richardson self-reported concussion symptoms, and he thinks it took place on the second touchdown run, when he got flipped over into the end zone.
— Nate Atkins (@NateAtkins_)
September 17, 2023
This doesn’t really change much about the prognosis.
He will still be monitored heavily throughout the week, and concussions vary from player to player in terms of recovery time.
Richardson still managed to make a major impact before he left.
He was 6-of-10 passing for 56 yards while adding three carries for 35 rushing yards and two rushing touchdowns.
We’ll see what happens throughout the week as the Colts prepare for the upcoming matchup against the Baltimore Ravens, but hopefully, this is a short-term injury.
Around the world, many celebrities have tried to de-stigmatise mental health issues by openly talking about their own experiences.
From Prince Harry to Deepika Padukone, singer Selena Gomez to now rapper, singer and songwriter Honey Singh.
Singh, during a recent interview with Siddharth Kannan, opened up about his health problems and how he has been struggling to make a comeback.
The singer, who has previously talked about dealing with bipolar disorder, told the television and radio host, “When I took ill, a lot was going on in my life.
There was a tour with Shah Rukh Khan, a show with Star Plus that I had worked on for a year; I had named it ‘Raw Star’.
I was also doing a film in Punjabi.
Lots of things were happening.”
He added, “When I collapsed, when I [was diagnosed with] bipolar disorder and started to have psychotic symptoms on the sets of Raw Star, I realised something was wrong with my brain, something had happened to it.
I wanted to rectify it.
My family said, ‘You are bound by contract, you will get sued.
There will be a huge loss.’
I said, ‘I don’t care.
I have to fix this.’
It took me five years.”
Advertisement
ALSO READ | Selena Gomez says she may not be able to carry children of her own due to bipolar disorder meds
When he started to make a comeback, the singer was criticised for his weight gain.
“My songs were a hit but people were not accepting me.”
He has since worked on himself, towards his look and fitness, he shared during the interview.
View this post on Instagram A post shared by Yo Yo Honey Singh (@yoyohoneysingh)
For the unversed, bipolarity is a mood disorder characterised by mood swings.
Previously, Dr Ekta Soni, chief clinical psychologist, Apollo Indraprastha Hospital had told indianexpress.com that while mood changes are common in people, if someone experiences lack of sleep and a significant change in their personality for more than four weeks, they are advised to consult a doctor.
Dr Bhagwat Narayan Rajput, consultant – psychiatry, HCMCT Manipal Hospitals, Dwarka told this outlet that mood swings may either be depressive episodes or manic episodes.
“In depressive episodes, there may be loss of interest, someone may feel low, have difficulty falling asleep, inability to focus and concentrate, general weakness and lack of motivation.
“In manic episodes, one may experience inflated self-esteem, increased sense of well-being; they may be hyperactive, over-talkative, over-social and over-familiar.
When it reaches its high — that is, mania with psychotic symptoms — a person may even start to feel godly, having extraordinary powers.
They may sleep less and still feel energetic, become workaholics,” the doctor explained.
View this post on Instagram A post shared by Yo Yo Honey Singh (@yoyohoneysingh)
He added that psychotic symptoms are present in depressive episodes, too, which could be mild, moderate or severe.
“In case of a severe depressive episode, psychotic symptoms are possible.”
Severe depressive episode, he said, can be classified into:
1.
One with psychotic symptoms
2.
One without psychotic symptoms
“There could be delusion; the patient may feel people are conspiring against them.
They may feel they are trapped, watched.
There are also possibilities of hallucinations such as hearing voices, along with a feeling that the world is coming to an end,” said Dr Rajput.
Advertisement
Speaking about weight gain, the expert said it is not because of the illness, but because of depression causing “increased stress eating“.
“In mania, the person may feel more inclined to eat junk food.
The majority of weight gain may be because of the medicines given to bipolar patients,” he concluded.
📣
For more lifestyle news, follow us on Instagram | Twitter | Facebook and don’t miss out on the latest updates!
March 18, 2021
Data from millions of users of the ZOE COVID Symptom Study app has shown that a persistent cough can be a symptom of COVID-19.
Here’s how to spot it and what it feels like.
What is the ‘COVID cough’ like?
A persistent cough is widely known as one of the three ‘classic’ symptoms of COVID-19, along with fever and loss of smell, although only around four in ten people who are ill with COVID-19 will have a persistent cough.
In this context, persistent means coughing many times a day, for half a day or more.
It can be hard to notice if you’re coughing more than usual, so make sure you’re keeping an eye on yourself and others around you.
This is usually a dry (unproductive) cough, unless you have an underlying lung condition that normally makes you cough up phlegm or mucus.
However, if you have COVID-19 and start coughing up yellow or green phlegm (‘gunk’)
then this may be a sign of an additional bacterial infection in the lungs that needs treatment.
Coughing is a major way that coronavirus spreads.
If you have a cough that could be COVID-19 you must get a test and self-isolate.
Whether you’re ill or not, always make sure you cover your coughs - for example by coughing into your elbow - and wear a face covering or mask to protect others.
When does a cough happen in COVID-19?
Coughing tends to come a few days into the illness, although it can be there from the start, and usually lasts for an average of four or five days.
How common is a cough in COVID-19?
Coughing is a reasonably common symptom of COVID-19, affecting more than four in ten (46%) adults who are ill with the disease.
It’s less common in children, affecting around a quarter of children (26%).
Importantly, this means that just over half of adults and three quarters of children with COVID-19 will not have a cough.
Coughing usually occurs along with other symptoms, and only around one in ten people with COVID-19 have a persistent cough as their only symptom.
What other symptoms of COVID-19 are common alongside coughing?
A persistent cough is highly likely to occur alongside fatigue (tiredness) and headaches.
It often comes together with symptoms like a sore throat, chest pain, shortness of breath, hoarseness and loss of smell.
Depending on your age and sex, you should contact your doctor if you have multiple different symptoms of COVID-19 in the first week of being ill.
What should I do if I have a cough and think it might be COVID-19?
If you start coughing more than normal without an obvious explanation, it could be COVID-19.
You should:
Coughing a lot can be uncomfortable.
It’s best to avoid lying on your back, so try to sit up or lie on your side instead.
Staying hydrated is important, and drinking warm water or having a spoonful of honey can also help to ease your cough.
Find out more about how to treat the symptoms of COVID-19 from the NHS website.
COVID-19 can cause blood oxygen levels to fall dangerously, even for people who seem to be breathing normally.
If you fall ill, you can buy a pulse oximeter or ask your doctor to send you one to monitor your blood oxygen levels at home.
Having an underlying lung condition can increase the risk from COVID-19.
You can find advice for people with asthma on our blog, and the British Lung Foundation has lots of helpful information about lung conditions and COVID-19.
You should get urgent medical help if you have worsening shortness of breath, are breathing very fast, or your lips or face are turning blue.
Stay safe and keep logging.
Small bowel, mid-, and hindgut dysmotility involvement has often been associated with pathologies of intragastric motility.
Not only GI but genitourinary dysfunction may be associated with fore- and mid-gut dysfunction in GpS. Equally well described are abnormalities of the autonomic and sensory nervous system, which have recently been better quantified.
Serologic measures, such as channelopathies and other antibody mediated abnormalities, have been recently noted.
Suspected for many years, immune dysregulation has now been documented in patients with GpS. Further investigation, including genetic dysregulation of immune measures, is ongoing.
Other mechanisms include systemic and local inflammation, hormonal abnormalities, macro- and micronutrient deficiencies, dysregulation in GI microbiome, and physical frailty.
The above factors may play a role in the pathophysiology of GpS, and it is likely that many of these are involved with a given patient presenting for care.9
Diagnosis of GpS
Diagnosis of GpS is often delayed and can be challenging; various tools have been developed, but not all are used.
A diagnostic approach for patients with symptoms of Gp is listed below, and Figure 2 details a diagnostic approach and treatment options for symptomatic patients.
Fig.
2: Diagnostic and treatment approach for patients with gastroparesis symptoms explained.
Symptom Assessment: Initially Gp symptoms can be assessed using Food and Drug Administration–approved patient-reported outcomes, including frequency and severity of nausea, vomiting, anorexia/early satiety, bloating/distention, and abdominal pain on a 0-4, 0-5 or 0-10 scale.
The Gastrointestinal Cardinal Symptom Index or visual analog scales can also be used.
It is also important to evaluate midgut and hindgut symptoms.9-11
Mechanical obstruction assessment: Mechanical obstruction can be ruled out using upper endoscopy or barium studies.
Physiologic testing: The most common is radionuclide gastric emptying testing (GET).
Compliance with guidelines, standardization, and consistency of GETs is vital to help with an accurate diagnosis.
Currently, two consensus recommendations for the standardized performance of GETs exist.12,13 Breath testing is FDA approved in the United States and can be used as an alternative.
Wireless motility capsule testing can be complimentary.
Gastric dysrhythmias assessment: Assessment of gastric dysrhythmias can be performed in outpatient settings using cutaneous electrogastrogram, currently available in many referral centers.
Most patients with GpS have an underlying gastric electrical abnormality.14,15
Sphincter dysfunction assessment: Both proximal and distal sphincter abnormalities have been described for many years and are of particular interest recently.
Use of the functional luminal imaging probe (FLIP) shows patients with GpS may have decreased sphincter distensibility when examining the comparisons of the cross-sectional area relative to pressure Using this information, sphincter therapies can be offered.16-18
Other testing: Neurologic and autonomic testing, along with psychosocial, genetic and frailty assessments, are helpful to explore.19 Nutritional evaluation can be done using standardized scales, such as subjective global assessment and serologic testing for micronutrient deficiency or electrical impedance.20
ALL RIGHT.
THANKS
A LOT, OLIVIA.
IN OTHER NEWS TONIGHT, DOCTORS AND EXPERTS ARE WEIGHING IN NOW ON FENTANYL OVERDOSE, AS AFTER WE SAW TEN PEOPLE HOSPITALIZED JUST LAST NIGHT IN ADAMS COUNTY.
THEY’RE
BREAKING DOWN THE SIGNS AS SYMPTOMS.
AND WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW IN CASE YOU’RE EVER NEAR
THIS DRUG WLWT NEWS 5 RACHEL WERTHEIMER JOINS US HERE IN THE STUDIO WITH A VERY LATEST RACHEL.
WELL, CURTIS AND LINDSAY, I WANT TO MENTION THE EXPERTS WE SPOKE WITH TODAY ARE NOT AFFILIATED WITH THE ADAMS COUNTY JAIL IN ANY WAY.
A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE ASKING IF IT’S POSSIBLE TO SUFFER FROM A FENTANYL OVERDOSE IF YOU’RE NEAR THE DRUG
OR
IF IT TOUCHES YOU.
TONIGHT, WE GOT THOSE ANSWERS.
I CAN SEE THE FEAR.
BUT IF WE CAN TEMPER THAT FEAR DOWN WITH WHAT’S REALITY, WE CAN WORK IN THE MIDDLE.
WE CAN FIND EXACTLY THE BEST WAY TO RESPOND TO THIS.
EXPERTS ARE TRYING TO SET THE RECORD STRAIGHT ABOUT THE LETHAL STREET DRUG FENTANYL.
THE SCIENCE AND RESEARCH IS SHOWING THAT WE HAVE NOT SEEN A CONFIRMED CASE OF WHAT WE WOULD CALL AN ACCIDENTAL EXPOSURE.
ON FRIDAY NIGHT, THE ADAMS COUNTY CHIEF DEPUTY SAID TWO INMATES SUFFERED FROM A SUSPECTED OVERDOSE AND WERE ADMINISTERED NARCAN.
THREE CORRECTION OFFICERS AND ONE BAILIFF, ONE PROBATION OFFICER AND THREE PARAMEDICS ALL REPORTEDLY DEVELOPED SYMPTOMS AND WERE HOSPITALIZED LAST NIGHT.
A LETHAL DOSE CAN FIT ON THE END OF A PENCIL.
NATHAN MCGEE IS A LICENSED PROFESSIONAL
AT RESTORING HOPE, COUNSELING AND COACHING.
HE’S SEEN THE EFFECTS FENTANYL CAN HAVE.
IT’S PRETTY LOW OF CHANCES THAT YOU WOULD DIE FROM JUST SKIN EXPOSURE.
MOST OF THE TIME, IT’S GOING TO BE INHALED OR INJECTED OR INGESTED MOUTH.
EXPERTS AGREE ABOUT THE IMPACTS OF FENTANYL.
IT’S HOW SOMEONE CAN OVERDOSE.
STAT LAW ENFORCEMENT AND DOCTORS SAY IS CAUSING CONFUSION.
THE ONLY WAY THAT YOU COULD TRULY HAVE AN OVERDOSE OR
GET FENTANYL INTO YOUR SYSTEM IS BY INJECTING IT.
AND SO THAT WOULD BE AN INTENTIONAL ACTION.
AND SO, I MEAN, PEOPLE WHO USE FENTANYL USUALLY INJECTED OR SNORTED.
THE ADAMS COUNTY SHERIFF SAYS EVERYONE WHO WAS TREATED AT THE HOSPITAL LAST NIGHT FROM THE JAIL HAS SINCE BEEN RELEASED.
SOME SYMPTOMS OF A FENTANYL OVERDOSE.
ACCORDING TO THE CDC, INCLUDE FALLING ASLEEP, SLOW, WEAK OR
NO BREATHING AND CHOKING OR GURGLING SOUNDS.
IF YOU SEE THIS HAPPENING TO SOMEONE, YOU SHOULD CALL 911.
Advertisement Experts weighing in on signs and symptoms of fentanyl overdose following recent incident Experts weighing in on signs and symptoms of fentanyl overdose following recent incident Share Copy Link Copy
Doctors and experts are weighing in on fentanyl overdoses after 10 people were hospitalized on Friday night in Adams County.
The experts WLWT spoke with are not affiliated with the Adams County Jail in any way.
"I can see the fear, but if we can temper that fear down with what's reality, we can work in the middle.
We can find exactly the best way to respond to this," Newtown chief of police, Tom Synan said.
Experts are trying to set the record straight about the lethal street drug, fentanyl.
"The science and research is showing that we have not seen a confirmed case of what we would call an accidental exposure," Synan said.
"Again, part of it's because it's not testing but when there has been testing, it has not shown that there was fentanyl in the system.
"On
Friday night, according to the chief deputy, two inmates overdosed in a cell and were administered Narcan before being taken to the hospital.
Both were released Friday night, according to the department.
In addition, two male corrections officers, one bailiff, one female corrections officer, one female probation officer and three paramedics all reportedly developed symptoms and were hospitalized Friday.
According to officials, some have since been released and others are under observation at the hospital.
According to the Adams County sheriff, everyone who was sent to the hospital has been released.
"A lethal dose can fit on the end of the pencil," licensed professional counselor at Restoring Hope Counseling and Coaching, Nathan McGee, said.
McGee has seen the effects fentanyl can have.
"It's a pretty low chances that you would die from just skin exposure.
Most of the time, it's going to be inhaled or injected or ingested to the mouth," McGee said.
Experts agree about the impacts of fentanyl.
It's how someone can overdose that law enforcement and doctors say is causing confusion.
"The only way that you could truly have an overdose or get fentanyl into your system is by ingesting it and so that would be an intentional action and so, I mean people who use fentanyl usually inject it or snort it," medical toxicologist and addiction and emergency physician, Dr. Ryan Marino said.
Some symptoms of a fentanyl overdose, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention include falling asleep, slow, weak, or no breathing, choking or gurgling sounds.
If you see this happening to someone, you should call 911.
Causes
Continuous use of a substance can cause you to become physically and emotionally dependent on the drug.
As a result, you might also need to use more of the same substance to get the same relief or effects of the drug you previously experienced before your addiction.
How long it takes to become dependent on a substance varies on factors like your overall health and the substance you're using.
The primary cause of withdrawal is suddenly cutting back or quitting the use of a substance after a long period of time.
Withdrawal symptoms can be very difficult to endure.
That's because your body is adjusting to no longer being on a substance and trying to balance itself without being under the influence of the drug.
As a result, your brain's chemistry might temporarily change during withdrawal, which causes you to experience physical and mental symptoms.
Diagnosis
Withdrawal symptoms can range from mild to severe and, in some cases, be life-threatening.
If you're thinking about stopping or cutting back on a substance you've been using for a long time, it's good practice to talk to your healthcare provider about how to safely withdraw from the drug.
They can help you plan for withdrawal, teach you about the withdrawal symptoms you might experience, offer medications to make the process easier, or give you resources for extra support.
There's no one specific test that providers use to diagnose withdrawal.
However, if you're experiencing withdrawal symptoms, your healthcare provider will likely:
Ask you about your medical history, the substances you've been using, and other lifestyle habits
Inquire about the physical symptoms you have, how you're feeling emotionally, and your decision to stop using substances
Perform a physical exam to check for common withdrawal symptoms such as a rapid heartbeat, shaky hands, and headaches
Order blood or urine tests to check for toxins or substances that are still in your system and to evaluate your overall health
Refer you to a mental health provider for support and further treatment, such as psychotherapy, to help you work through your healing journey with more ease
Treatment
Treatment for withdrawal primarily includes support from your loved ones and healthcare team, lifestyle changes, medications, and if necessary, a medical detox.
Withdrawal can be extremely challenging to undergo.
If you are considering becoming sober, talk to your provider about what treatments can help make this process easier for you.
They may offer the following:
Seeking support from your loved ones to hold you accountable after you stop using a substance
Working with a mental health provider or trying therapy to help you reframe your thoughts about substance use and find healthier ways to cope
Joining a support group for additional care during your healing journey
Taking over-the-counter medications to reduce symptoms like anxiety, nausea, or difficulty sleeping
Eating nutritious foods
Spending time in nature
Participating in some type of physical activity or exercise throughout the week
Getting enough sleep
Abruptly withdrawing from a more serious drug, such as a depressant or opioid, can be life-threatening.
That's why it's essential to talk to your provider before you stop using a substance you've used for a long time.
In these cases, your provider may recommend you undergo a medical detox.
A medical detox program provides around-the-clock care from a licensed professional as you safely stop using a substance.
They can monitor your vital signs, keep track of the symptoms you're experiencing, give you in-house support at a facility, ensure your safety, and offer any necessary medications to help you reduce severe symptoms.
Prevention
The most effective way to prevent withdrawal is by abstaining from any use of substances.
However, this practice is often easier said than done.
Several factors can increase your risk of using substances, such as chronic stress, grief, childhood trauma, life changes (like moving, getting a divorce, or losing a job), peer pressure, or having a family history of substance use.
Having a social support system and knowing healthier coping mechanisms for stress can reduce your risk.
If you are reliant on a substance, you are not alone.
Taking substances to ease major stressors or pain doesn't make you a failure—it just means that you may need a little more support to get on your treatment journey and successfully heal.
Unfortunately, there's no surefire way to prevent withdrawal symptoms, because it's your body's natural response when you stop using a substance.
However, the following tips can make your recovery just a bit easier:
Be open with your loved ones about your experience and ask them for the support you need
Work with your healthcare team to learn how to manage the physical and emotional symptoms of withdrawal
Implement other coping techniques for stress, such as eating nutritious foods on time, walking or doing another physical activity, taking part in hobbies you enjoy (or starting a new one), and getting enough sleep
Give yourself grace and be patient as you recover
A Quick Review
Withdrawal is a complex and often challenging process your body goes through once you stop using a substance.
Your withdrawal symptoms can depend on factors like what substances you used and how long you used them.
It's common to experience symptoms like anxiety, fatigue, headaches, and trouble sleeping as you go through withdrawal.
Your journey to sobriety can be mentally and physically grueling.
If you're thinking about quitting a substance, it's important to work with your healthcare provider.
They can help you make a plan to safely withdraw from a substance, give you treatments to ease withdrawal symptoms, and offer resources for extra support.
Following your withdrawal plan, implementing lifestyle changes, and relying on your loved ones can make this experience a more effective path toward recovery.
Interviewer: You experience some sort of a traumatic brain injury earlier in life, and then you receive treatments and your symptoms have been reduced or gone away, and then years later you start to notice some symptoms again that you might think have something to do with that traumatic brain injury you had earlier in your life.
Dr. Derrick Allred is at the Neilsen Rehabilitation Center at University of Utah Health.
And I guess the first question for this is can somebody experience symptoms later from an injury that they had to their brain earlier in their life?
Late-Onset Symptoms Following Brain Injury
Dr. Allred: The answer to that question is, "Well, it depends."
So people typically think of traumatic brain injury in its most common form, which is a concussion, or a mild traumatic brain injury.
But the scope of brain injury and the damage that you can do can be on the milder side or it can be on the more severe side.
The one common complaint that I see in the clinic is someone who, let's say, in high school had a bunch of concussions playing football.
Ten years later, they're starting to have headaches.
And so they say, "Doc, I had these concussions.
Now I'm having headaches.
I'm worried it's from my old traumatic brain injuries."
And then we'll go through a series of, "Well, let's see if we can find other causes.
Is it something in your diet?
Are there other stressors or are there other issues that are contributing to the headaches?"
The same can be said for cognitive issues, mood issues, and sleep issues.
Those are the typical problems that we see in clinic, after someone has sustained a concussion and they come back several years later with concerns after the fact.
Linking Current Symptoms to Past Trauma
Interviewer: And when somebody comes in and they're concerned that a concussion earlier in their life is causing some issues later in their life, what does that conversation with them look like?
And what do you do to try to figure out if that's the case or not?
Dr. Allred:
Well, the first thing we would do is get a very complete and comprehensive history of the event surrounding the brain injury.
As much as the patient can remember, the mechanism of what transpired, the symptoms that occurred afterward, how long they dealt with those symptoms, and what the recovery looked like.
And then we would take what symptom, say, a headache or a mood disorder, and we would really dig down with questioning and physical exam to try and tease out other potential possibilities of what could or could not be causing the symptoms that the patient is presenting with.
Because it's attributing something to a brain injury, whether it be mood, cognition, pain, sensory disturbances, or functioning in any regard, is a diagnosis of exclusion.
So we just have to be thorough and comprehensive in making sure that we are familiar with other potential causes before we would attribute it to a brain injury.
And so that's part of what the workup is.
It's not so much to attribute it to the brain injury as much as it is to make sure that it's not something else that's going on.
Interviewer:
Do you find that patients that come in tend to think that these new symptoms are a result of the brain injury they had, and then you find that, no, actually it was something else?
Dr. Allred: The vast majority of the time, if someone truly did just have a single concussion . . .
And there are complaints in the clinic that most of the time we can find other potential causes.
However, that also depends on the nature of the brain injury.
Sometimes people will say, "Well, I had a concussion," and then actually maybe the nature of their brain injury was a little more severe than what they thought.
There are protocols and there are things that we look at in terms of testing that we would pursue depending on what your history and symptoms are.
Treatment Approach: Addressing Symptoms Holistically
Interviewer:
And then after you figure that out, what's your kind of rate of success of being able to uncover that mystery and solve that mystery and help the patient with whatever it is they happen to be suffering from?
Dr. Allred:
Well, I'm biased, but I think we do a good job.
We are fortunate in my field to not work in a silo.
So in rehabilitation management, particularly in brain injury management, we have multiple disciplines to address specific needs, whether it be psychologists, or therapists of varying specialties, to really look at the patient holistically and take both pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic approaches to manage patients.
Every patient is different.
I tell patients that everyone's brain injury is different.
No two brain injuries are alike.
And so we really have to take inventory of what that patient's presentation is and what they need to do to get back to what they would deem normal life and really structure a rehab and treatment program to help them reach their goals.
Managing Patient Concerns and Expectations
Interviewer:
It would seem to me that this is kind of . . .
you're solving a mystery, right?
You're really trying to figure out, "What is the cause here?"
Does that usually take a long time or does it take a short time?
I mean, generally, what kind of timeframe are you looking like?
Dr. Allred: It doesn't generally take too long, but again, everyone is different.
We are thorough.
If we can address issues in short order, then great.
Sometimes we have to go down rabbit holes to help the patients and we’re more than willing to do that.
So it just depends.
Interviewer:
And I know it could also be frustrating to patients too, right?
Somebody comes in and they're like, "Well, why don't you just fix this problem?"
But sometimes it's a little bit more complicated than that and some detective work has to be done.
Oftentimes it's not, but sometimes it is.
Dr. Allred: And sometimes there isn't an answer.
Medicine isn't an exact science.
But we always strive to do our best to at least make sure that serious issues aren't occurring and then go from there.
Interviewer:
Yeah, and try to take care of the symptoms as best one can even if there isn't an answer, trying to help that patient manage those and live their life as normal as possible.
Dr. Allred: There is no shame in seeking out medical attention when you have worrisome symptoms.
The vast majority of patients, when they've had a concussion, if later in life they're having some symptoms that they may attribute to a potential brain issue, then come.
Let us evaluate that and we can tease out whether or not it is related to the brain or if there are some other things that we can do to intervene to help you get back the reassurance or to address any issues that need to be treated or dealt with.
Interviewer:
And I could imagine for patients, sometimes it could be worrisome when all of a sudden, years later, they develop these symptoms that they think might be a result of a brain injury that they had earlier in their life.
And then that could be kind of concerning.
I mean, is this going to lead to something worse?
Generally, does it, or generally does it not?
Dr. Allred: Generally speaking, in the setting of a concussion or even in the setting of a few isolated concussions, most patients end up being okay.
And I think getting that reassurance is probably one of the more important things.
But I don't want patients to think that they had a concussion and so they shouldn't worry about being seen.
Any time you have a concern, I mean, it's certainly an appropriate step to reach out to a provider to make sure you go through an evaluation.
If there's a concern of something going on in the brain years after a concussion, then we are more able and willing to do an investigation to make sure that, one, there isn't something else occurring, and addressing those issues as they come up.
A survey by the charity Blood Cancer UK has found that over half of UK adults cannot name a single symptom of blood cancer, despite it being the third-biggest cause of cancer deaths in the country.
Advertisement Advertisement
The charity asked participants to list what they believed were common signs of blood cancer.
As well as over 56 percent of people being unable to list a single symptom, only 1 percent of the 2,035 adults named fever, and 3 percent naming breathlessness.
Awareness of symptoms appears to have gone down since 2018 when the same survey found 52 percent of people were unable to name a symptom of the cancer.
Advertisement Advertisement
The charity is concerned that with little awareness of symptoms of the disease, new cases could be going undiagnosed after being mistaken by the public for cases of COVID-19.
“Sadly, symptoms such as fatigue, weight loss and night sweats can sometimes be dismissed or downplayed and the result can be devastating," Kate Keightley, head of support services at Blood Cancer UK, said.
"During the height of the pandemic, we saw far fewer people being diagnosed with blood cancer, and one of the reasons for this could be that some of the symptoms of blood cancer are easily mistaken for Covid.
It’s extremely worrying that public awareness that these could be signs of blood cancer continues to be so low."
According to the charity, who are trying to publicize signs of the disease to mark Blood Cancer Awareness Month, blood cancer symptoms include:
Unexplained weight loss
Unexplained bruising or bleeding
Lumps or swellings
Shortness of breath
Drenching night sweats
Infections that are persistent, recurrent, or severe
Fever (38 °C (100 °F) or above) that is unexplained
Rash or itchy skin that is unexplained
Pain in your bone, joints, or abdominal
Tiredness that doesn’t improve with rest or sleep (fatigue)
Unusually pale complexion (pallor)
One in 19 people is diagnosed with blood cancer in their lifetime.
Like with all cancers, the earlier it is caught, the more chance a patient has of a better outcome.
“Getting diagnosed as early as possible can really help improve the success of treatment for a number of types of blood cancer," Keightley continued.
"We’re concerned that the pandemic has put people off going to their GP and the impact this is having on catching cancer early.
If you have symptoms that cannot be explained and are persistent, you should urgently make an appointment with your GP.
While it is unlikely to be anything serious, it’s so important to get checked out.”
But bloating can also be a sign of ascites, which according to the British Liver Trust, is commonly caused by liver disease.
Ascites is the medical term used to describe the abnormal build-up of fluid in the abdominal cavity, it says.
Over seven in 10 cases of ascites is caused by cirrhosis of the liver.
It further explains: “When patients suffer from cirrhosis, the liver and kidneys stop working properly and fluid stops being exchanged within the cells in the way it should.
This leads to ascites.
READ MORE:
Gallbladder cancer symptoms:
Dark urine could be a sign of the deadly disease
About 80 percent of people with COVID-19 develop mild disease, according to a research review from March 2021.
Another 5 percent of people with COVID-19 need intensive care.
The most typical symptoms are cough, fever, and fatigue, but many others are possible.
Much more is known about COVID-19 symptoms now than at the beginning of the pandemic.
Researchers have linked dry eyes and other eye symptoms to COVID-19 infection.
Keep reading to learn what the latest research has found about the connection between COVID-19 and dry eyes.
Are dry eyes a symptom of COVID-19?
Dry eyes aren’t one of the most common symptoms of COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2).
And dry eyes in the absence of flu-like symptoms are unlikely to mean you have COVID-19.
Dry eyes are a common condition, especially in people over age 50.
According to the American Academy of Ophthalmology, about 4.9 million people over age 50 in the United States had dry eyes as of 2015.
Researchers have found, however, that dry eyes seem to be more common in people with COVID-19 than in people without the coronavirus.
A large review of studies published in early 2021 found that in a group of 8,219 people with COVID-19, approximately 1 in 10 experienced eye symptoms.
Dry eyes or the feeling of having a foreign object in an eye was the most common eye symptom.
It was reported in 16 percent of people who developed eye symptoms and 1.7 percent of people with COVID-19.
The reason why COVID-19 contributes to dry eyes still isn’t clear.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to enter cells in your body through an enzyme called angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2).
ACE2 has been identified in the epithelial cells that cover the surface of your eyes, according to research from June 2020 .
Research from 2018 has found that inflammation from your body’s immune response can contribute to dry eyes.
In theory, if the coronavirus enters the cells that line your eyes, it could impair your body’s ability to keep the surface of your eyes moist.
Other factors indirectly unrelated to COVID-19 infection, such as wearing a mask and spending more time in front of a screen during the pandemic, may also contribute to dry eyes.
Can wearing a facial covering cause dry eye?
Face coverings are crucial for slowing the spread of COVID-19, but they may also contribute to eye dryness.
Ophthalmologists have been seeing an increased number of people reporting dry eyes since the start of the pandemic, according to a 2021 letter to the editor .
When your mask sits loosely against your face, exhaled air can travel upward and accelerate the rate that your eyes lose moisture.
People who already have dry eyes are most likely to experience dry eyes from prolonged mask usage.
Increased screen time is another factor that may contribute to the number of people reporting eye dryness.
Since the start of the pandemic, many people have switched to virtual working or learning.
Spending an extended amount of time looking at a screen leads to a slower blinking rate and decreased eye moisture.
When to see a doctor There’s no cure for COVID-19.
If you have mild symptoms, you can treat them at home by: getting plenty of rest
staying hydrated
taking over-the-counter medications like ibuprofen to help manage pain and fever It’s also critical to isolate yourself from others and avoid public spaces to avoid spreading the virus.
According to the CDC , most adults can stop quarantining 10 days after symptom onset, if they haven’t had a fever for at least 24 hours.
Medical emergency symptoms You should seek emergency care immediately if you or somebody you’re taking care of experiences any of the CDC’s emergency symptoms .
These are: trouble breathing
persistent chest pain or pressure
new confusion
pale gray or blue lips, skin, or nails.
an inability to stay awake or wake up People with darker skin may have more trouble seeing skin discoloration that indicates a lack of oxygen.
In its 20-year history, Shinedown has released 31 singles.
But the rock band’s hit, “A Symptom of Being Human,” might be its most crucial.
Over gentle acoustic guitar, swelling strings and piano, singer Brent Smith emotes in his rocker voice words that are heartfelt and relatable.
“You’ve always been slightly awkward, kinda weird.
Upside down and not all here” before a surging chorus furthers the sentiment: “Sometimes I’m in a room where I don’t belong/
And the house is on fire and there’s no alarm/and the walls are melting, too.”
When Smith and bassist Eric Bass wrote the song for Shinedown’s 2022 “Planet Zero” album, Smith says they were acutely aware of the tendency to become so preoccupied with the cacophony of life that “you forget to check in on yourself.”
Need a break?
Play the USA TODAY Daily Crossword Puzzle.
In the midst of Mental Health Awareness Month, it’s also a timely reminder.
“I think people feel if they talk about the fact that they’re dealing with depression and anxiety, there’s something wrong with them,” Smith, 45, says.
“But you don’t need to feel embarrassed or ashamed if you need to reach out to someone who can help you.
If you can tell something is off, the worst thing you can do is be quiet and not listen to the person.
And if you are having those emotions, we don’t want you to be quiet, either.”
Shinedown donated $150,000 to suicide prevention
Openly sharing struggles with depression isn’t new for Shinedown, which also includes drummer Barry Kerch and guitarist Zach Myers.
The band’s 2018 album, “Attention Attention” was deeply influenced by Bass’ suffering from clinical depression, while “Planet Zero” also includes the scorching rocker “Dead Don’t Die,” which reiterates the power of resilience.
For more than a decade, Shinedown has worked with the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, participating in national walks to bring awareness to the effects of depression and donating money to the organization.
The band just wrapped The Revolutions Live tour – they’ll play festivals this summer and headline a run with Papa Roach and Spiritbox in the fall – and generated $150,000 ($1 from each ticket sold) for the suicide prevention foundation
“A lot of times people think (if you’re depressed) you just want attention and that’s not the case,” Smith says.
“The AFSP is good at knowing what to do and how to handle things.”
Shinedown goes to pop radio to reach widest mainstream audience
In addition to the importance of their music, Shinedown has quietly maintained a couple of notable Billboard chart records.
The band has earned the most No. 1 singles in the 40-year history of the Mainstream Rock Songs chart with 18 and also holds the record for the most Top 10 songs on the Mainstream Rock Airplay chart with 30, starting with 2003’s “Fly From the Inside.”
But while their rock bona fides are indisputable, and songs such as “Second Chance” crossed into the Top 40 in 2009, Smith and the band want “A Symptom of Being Human” to reach the widest possible mainstream audience.
“What makes ‘Symptom’ so unique is we decided not to work it at rock radio first.
The goal was to start it at Hot AC (adult contemporary) with the foresight of moving it to Top 40,” Smith says.
The song is No. 22 on Billboard’s Adult Pop Airplay chart and is the second most-played song this week on SiriusXM’s The Pulse, whose core artists include Taylor Swift, Coldplay and Pink.
But Smith’s strategy is about more than positioning, as he expresses frustration about the hindrances of pigeonholing genres.
“For whatever reason, there is this mentality that a ‘rock’ band can’t be played on ‘this’ format because that’s not what they are,” he says.
“It should all be inclusive because at the end of the day, it’s about the song and if the song is necessary to the public.
We’re trying to open the door to young rock bands too.
Why is the barrier there?”
Why 'A Symptom of Being Human' is 'extremely necessary'
Smith likens the longevity of Shinedown to a marriage, and one in which “nobody goes to bed angry…we’ve been able to have 20 years of being in this band because we’ve never stopped talking to each other.”
That symbiosis also factors into the writing process.
And with “Symptom,” Smith feels there were some signs of the universe at work, including hearing “November Rain” by Guns N’ Roses “popping up everywhere” and inspiring the opening lyric “I can still remember me and Miss November Rain.”
“When I look at the writing process of the song, I think Eric and I were more of a vessel for the song to be born.
You get a gift every once in a while when writing an album.
You have no idea where it came from, but the song presents itself to you and you have to hold on and write it,” Smith says.
“We really feel ‘Symptom’ is extremely necessary for everyone.”
On the road again.
More music stories:
How Long Does a Crohn’s Flare Last?
The length and frequency of a Crohn’s flare are highly individual, says David S. Lee, MD, a gastroenterologist at NewYork–Presbyterian in New York City.
According to Harvard Health Publishing, a flare can last anywhere from a few weeks to several months.
Flare-ups can happen after months or years of being in remission.
For this reason, it's important to work with your doctor on the best treatment option and follow the treatment schedule.
“Sometimes patients get better and then they think they’re cured and they stop the treatment without communicating with their doctor,” says Madalina Butnariu, MD, a gastroenterologist at the Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center in Columbus.
Stopping treatment on your own can lead to another flare up or may interfere with the efficacy of a medication.
How to Keep Your Disease in Remission
You can’t completely prevent disease flare-ups from happening.
But there are things you can do to manage your disease.
Effective medication helps with the management of Crohn’s disease.
“These medications treat inflammation and prevent complications,” Dr. Lee says.
Other steps to managing your disease include:
Tips for Managing Discomfort During a Flare
Reach for an OTC.
Over-the-counter medication is also a good option to relieve pain associated with a Crohn’s flare.
“If you have pain related to Crohn’s disease, take Tylenol only,” Lee says, “since ibuprofen and NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) can worsen inflammation.”
Over-the-counter medication is also a good option to relieve pain associated with a Crohn’s flare.
“If you have pain related to Crohn’s disease, take Tylenol only,” Lee says, “since ibuprofen and NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) can worsen inflammation.”
Use ointment.
You might experience anal irritation during a flare-up.
Instead of toilet paper, use a moist towelette or soft baby wipe.
At night, consider applying an all-purpose skin protectant such as Desitin around the surrounding anus area.
You might experience anal irritation during a flare-up.
Instead of toilet paper, use a moist towelette or soft baby wipe.
At night, consider applying an all-purpose skin protectant such as Desitin around the surrounding anus area.
Maintain a healthy diet.
Sticking to a nutritious IBD diet helps in alleviating flare-up symptoms.
If you’re lacking in a specific nutrient, consider taking a multivitamin as a supplement.
Sticking to a nutritious IBD diet helps in alleviating flare-up symptoms.
If you’re lacking in a specific nutrient, consider taking a multivitamin as a supplement.
Switch to medicinal mouthwashes.
Severe flare-ups occasionally create canker sores around the mouth.
Canker sores tend to go away once the flare-up is under control, but medicinal mouthwashes can help in the meantime to alleviate discomfort.
Severe flare-ups occasionally create canker sores around the mouth.
Canker sores tend to go away once the flare-up is under control, but medicinal mouthwashes can help in the meantime to alleviate discomfort.
Take a bath.
To relieve painful bowel movements, take care of your bottom by bathing in warm water.
To relieve painful bowel movements, take care of your bottom by bathing in warm water.
Stretch your joints.
About one in three people with Crohn’s disease will experience painful and swollen joints, according to Crohn’s & Colitis UK.
While flare-ups can bring back joint pain, it can be managed through a combination of medication, exercise, and physical therapy.
Your doctor may recommend a physiotherapist or physical therapist to work on stretching to reduce stiffness.
They might also recommend walking, swimming, or cycling to keep you moving your back and neck muscles.
Pilates can also help with stretching and strengthening your posture.
The Bottom Line
The better you’re prepared for a flare and how it will affect your routine, the better you’ll be at dealing with it when it occurs.
Above all, befriend your gastroenterologist.
You should tell your doctor about any changes in your disease and stay on track with all medical appointments for tests and procedures.
“Management of Crohn’s disease with medications and close follow-up with a gastroenterologist can help prevent Crohn’s flares in the first place,” Lee says.
Additional reporting by Jocelyn Solis-Moreira.
Home
Health
Laryngitis: Causes, Signs, Symptoms, and Treatment of Infection Urfi Javed is Suffering From
Laryngitis: Causes, Signs, Symptoms, and Treatment of Infection Urfi Javed is Suffering From
Bigg Boss OTT fame actress, Urfi Javed is diagnosed with Laryngitis.
Scroll down to know about this infection and whether is it too serious.
Laryngitis: Causes, Signs, Symptoms, and Treatment of Infection Urfi Javed is Suffering From
Popular internet sensation, Urfi Javed has been recently diagnosed with laryngitis on her vacation to Dubai and was hospitalized as her condition started to decline further.
Urfi, who is quite famous for her daring fashion appearances and reels on social media, shared a video on Instagram, Informing fans about her health condition.
‘This doctor finally diagnosed that I am suffering from Laryngitis and tonsillitis.’
After she informed her fans in the video, the doctor asked her not to speak.
The Bigg Boss OTT fame actress even posted a picture saying, ‘Half of my trip ended up recovering’.
What is Laryngitis?
Laryngitis is an inflammation of the vocal cords (larynx).
This organ is located in the upper neck, just behind the back of your throat.
The swelling of the vocal cords muffles sound and causes hoarseness.
So, whenever, you try to talk all comes out is a whisper or sweak.
Causes of Laryngitis:
According to WebMD, The most common cause of laryngitis is a viral infection of the respiratory tract
Other causes of acute and chronic Laryngitis are:
Cold or flu
Bronchitis
Smoking
Allergies
Throat Irritation
Sinus Disease
Fungal Infection
Symptoms And Treatment of Laryngitis:
According to Mayo Clinic, Laryngitis may be short-lived (acute) or long-lasting (chronic).
Although acute laryngitis usually is nothing more than an irritation, persistent hoarseness can signal a more serious problem.
Laryngitis often makes you feel the need to constantly clear your throat.
Other signs and symptoms may include:
Hoarseness
Weak voice
Tickling sensation and rawness of your throat
Sore throat
Dry throat
Dry cough
Laryngitis is usually a temporary problem that either improves by itself or clears after treatment.
You can manage most acute cases of laryngitis with self-care steps, such as resting your voice, drinking plenty of fluids and sucking on lozenges.
If hoarseness lasts for more than two weeks, see your health care provider.
If your child develops laryngitis and has a high-grade fever, won’t eat or drink, or has trouble breathing, see your health care provider right away.
For breaking news and live news updates, like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
Read more on Latest Health News on India.com.
The key ingredient in the illicit drug known as Ecstasy or Molly may offer profound relief from post-traumatic stress disorder.
When paired with intense talk therapy, MDMA drastically eased symptoms in people who had struggled with severe PTSD for years, a new study reports.
“This is a big deal,” says Steven Gold, a clinical psychologist in Fort Lauderdale and professor emeritus at Nova Southeastern University in Plantation, Fla.
“All other things being equal, the use of psychedelic medication can significantly improve the outcome.”
The results, published May 10 in Nature Medicine, are preliminary.
But the findings offer hope to the millions of people worldwide who have PTSD, for whom new treatments are desperately needed.
Antidepressants such as Zoloft and Paxil are often prescribed, but the drugs don’t work for an estimated 40 to 60 percent of people with PTSD.
Ninety people participated in the new study, which took place at 15 clinical sites in the United States, Canada and Israel.
All the participants received 15 therapy sessions with therapists trained to guide people as they experienced the drug.
Half of the participants received MDMA in three eight-hour therapy sessions; the other half received placebos during three eight-hour therapy sessions.
True to its nickname Ecstasy, MDMA evokes feelings of bliss and social connectedness.
The participants took the drug (or the placebo) while wearing eye covers and listening to music, and occasionally talking with their therapist about their experience.
On average, the participants improved by the end of the 18-week trial, showing fewer PTSD symptoms such as unwanted, intrusive memories.
But the benefits were far greater for people who took MDMA.
By the end of the trial, 67 percent of the participants who took MDMA had improved so much that they no longer qualified as having a PTSD diagnosis.
Among people who took placebos, 32 percent of the participants no longer met the criteria for PTSD at the end of the study.
Those evaluations came from independent clinicians who assessed people without knowing who had taken the drug.
Many of the people in the trial had been living with severe PTSD for years.
“Typically, we see PTSD as a disorder for life.
Now, we may begin to let that go,” says Eric Vermetten, a psychiatrist at the Leiden University Medical Center in the Netherlands who works with veterans and members of the military with PTSD and was not involved in the new study.
It’s not clear exactly how the drug changes the brain.
Some imaging studies suggest that MDMA dampens activity in the amygdala, a brain structure involved in fear.
Other results from mice hint that the drug may open a window of heightened social learning, a scenario that may strengthen the relationship between a patient and a therapist.
The study included weeks of therapy before, during and after MDMA sessions.
Those sessions required hard emotional work from the participants, says study coauthor Amy Emerson.
“[MDMA] is not a magic pill.”
The study was funded by the nonprofit group Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, or MAPS.
Emerson is the chief executive officer of MAPS Public Benefit Corporation in San Jose, Calif., which organized the trial.
Over three-quarters of the participants in the trial were white.
Without a more diverse group of people in the studies, it’s not clear whether therapy with MDMA would yield similar effects more generally, says Gold.
Nor is it clear how long the benefits might last.
Another clinical trial comparing MDMA’s effects on PTSD symptoms to a placebo is in the works, Emerson says, as well as expanded use of MDMA in clinics.
And researchers are following the health of the people in the current study to see whether the improvements last.
For now, the research is complicated by restrictions on MDMA, which remains an illicit drug in the United States.
“There are a lot of barriers to break down related to this treatment,” Emerson says.
“And there’s a lot of hope.”
Most people have suffered the nasty side effects of alcohol at least once in their lifetime.
But for some people, they never thought it could lead to a cancer diagnosis.
In extremely rare events, a type of cancer that is most common in young people can trigger symptoms when boozing.
Lymphoma is a blood cancer that is diagnosed 19,500 times a year in the UK.
Symptoms include a lump in the neck, armpit or groin, feeling worn out for no reason, unexplained weight loss, excessive sweating at night and constant itching for no reason.
There are around 60 different types of lymphoma, which are broadly grouped into Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin‘s lymphomas.
Alcohol-related symptoms are seen in those with Hodgkin’s lymphoma, diagnosed around 2,100 times a year in the UK, mostly in people in their early 20s or those over 70.
Lymphoma symptoms can appear in young people when they are drinking alcohol, according to research.
Getty Images
Around one in 20 will experience alcohol-induced pain, says Lymphoma Action.
This is felt in the lymph nodes — glands that are commonly found in the neck, armpit and groin.
Dr. Graham Collins, consultant hematologist at Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, said lymph glands are “packed with abnormal cells” when there is cancer.
He told the Sun: “Alcohol can relax blood vessels which may lead to a further increase in pressure within the lymph nodes, putting a strain on the surrounding capsule and causing pain.”
The lymph nodes may already be swollen, achy and painful.
Alcohol-related symptoms are seen in those with Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
iStock
Women with Hodgkin’s lymphoma are most prone to pain when drinking, according to Harvard doctors writing a paper in Anesthesiology.
They said: “The alcohol content of a liqueur-filled chocolate or even a sip of beer has been reported to trigger the pain.
“The onset of pain is immediate; the patient descriptions of pain vary from ‘aching’ to ‘stabbing,’ and the intensity ranges from mild to unbearable, forcing some patients to give up alcohol entirely.”
Some patients have also reported taking over-the-counter painkillers when drinking, completely unaware that the pain was a warning sign of a deadly disease.
For example, doctors in Nashville described a 31-year-old man who had been taking ibuprofen every time he drank for three months.
When he went to the hospital, he explained a history of severe chest pain minutes after ingesting only two or three sips of alcohol.
The man also had occasional fevers, night sweats and general fatigue, medics in Nashville said.
Scans showed the man had a mass on his lung and a biopsy of a lymph node on his windpipe confirmed a Hodgkin’s lymphoma diagnosis.
Luckily, treatment put him into full remission — and he was able to enjoy booze again as chemotherapy quickly stopped the chest pain.
Another male, 32, from China, presumed he had sciatica that was exacerbated by drinking until medics gave him a cancer diagnosis.
Lymphoma cancer is nearly always treatable; most people live for many years after being diagnosed.
But sadly, more than 500 people die of both Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s cancer each year in the UK.
Here's how to tell if your nausea, bloating , or fatigue could be the period flu or something more serious, and how to manage it.
You may be no stranger to premenstrual syndrome (PMS): Over 90 percent of women report experiencing some of the cumbersome symptoms that appear before their period, including bloating, cramping, fatigue, headaches, and moodiness, according to the Office on Women’s Health.
Beyond these PMS symptoms, some women also say they feel flu-ish, a term colloquially dubbed the “period flu.”
While it’s not an official diagnosis, here’s what might be going on—and how you can feel well.
Period flu symptoms
After ovulation, which occurs when the ovary releases an egg, levels of the hormones estrogen and progesterone begin to drop.
As you get your period, prostaglandins are released.
These hormones help your uterine lining shed and cause cramps.
“Prostaglandins are one of the reasons women suffer from painful periods,” says Christine Greves, MD, a board-certified ob-gyn at Winne Palmer Hospital for Women & Babies in Orlando, Florida.
In addition to causing cramping, prostaglandins also may be responsible for symptoms that resemble the flu—like headaches, nausea, and diarrhea.
Some women may even experience an elevated temperature or fever, but that’s a far less commonly reported symptom, says Dr. Greves.
(These are the period problems you should never ignore.)
The period flu shouldn’t be considered “normal,” says Felice Gersh, MD, a board-certified ob-gyn and integrative medicine doctor in Irvine, California.
“The menstrual cycle is a vital sign of well-being,” she says.
If you’re feeling physically awful every month because of PMS symptoms, including the period flu, you’ll want to consider the underlying cause.
Simply put: It can help clue you into what’s going on inside your body.
Period flu causes
It’s natural to have an uptick in inflammation during your period because prostaglandins are inflammatory hormones.
However, an overproduction of prostaglandins exacerbates the body’s inflammatory response, explains Dr. Gersh.
And that’s not great when it comes to PMS.
Feeling feverish, nauseated, and achy?
That’s a sign that your body is fighting something, says Dr. Gersh.
Frequently, that’s a virus, but it also could be because of uncontrolled inflammation.
Lifestyle factors, like poor sleep, unmanaged stress, lack of physical activity, and nutrient deficiencies may all affect how your hormones function, and lead to this inflammation that causes severe or unconventional PMS symptoms, she explains.
You also may suspect your period flu symptoms, such as nausea, bloating, and fatigue could be related to the early signs of pregnancy.
However, there is no association between the two, unless your period is late.
Oscar Wong/Getty Images
Track your cycle
The best thing you can do is to track how you feel and your symptoms along your cycle, says Dr. Greves.
If you’re nauseated several days every month—and you know to expect that—you won’t be caught off-guard when it happens again.
It can be very easy to forget what you were feeling and when from month-to-month, which is why writing it down can be so helpful.
Apps like Flo and MyFLO make this easy.
These can help you collect enough data to know what your norm is.
By the way, some people who have an intrauterine device (IUD) find that they don’t have the bleeding that would mark their period.
An IUD does not prevent you from ovulating, explains Dr. Greves, so you can still get PMS symptoms.
That makes tracking all the more important—whether you bleed or not.
Period flu treatments
When you need relief, Dr. Greves recommends taking an anti-prostaglandin medication.
You know these as NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), like ibuprofen or aspirin.
She says ginger could also help lessen nausea, and vitamin B6 may also decrease certain PMS symptoms, like bloating and irritability.
Take no more than 100 mg of B6 per day, she advises.
Dr. Gersh adds that you might consider taking 500 mg of magnesium (which may be effective for migraines), along with a curcumin (the main active ingredient in turmeric) supplement (an anti-inflammatory).
Period flu prevention
All of the healthy lifestyle habits you’ve been told are important for your general well-being will also have an effect on your PMS symptoms, says Dr. Gersh.
These are often dubbed as self-care: good sleep hygiene (e.g. going to sleep at set time each night, staying off of electronics before bed), a diet of whole foods (produce, healthy fats, whole grains), staying physically active, and spending time in nature can help lower stress and inflammation so you can feel better as soon as next month, she says.
The takeaway
Period problems vary by individual, but if you feel your period pain is disruptive to your daily life, you should talk with your doctor.
Sometimes period symptoms can signal an underlying condition, such as endometriosis.
This is a painful condition where tissue that’s similar to that in the uterine lining grows in places outside the uterus.
If you are worried that you actually have a virus that has made you sick, then you should call your doctor to talk over symptoms to rule out possible exposure to either influenza or Covid-19, and what steps to take next to care for yourself.
It can be difficult to know if symptoms are caused by a virus or something else.
Revisit your period tracking apps, check if your symptoms are in the range of normal for you, and talk to your doctor about anything you may be concerned about.
Use telemedicine safely for yourself and your loved ones With an ageing population and increasing incidence of chronic disease, telemedicine can improve access to care for patients, by helping to bridge the constraints of distance, time, and cost.
However, there are limitations to telemedicine – not all patients, conditions, and symptoms can be adequately managed over telemedicine.
Your doctor will not be able to do a physical examination or hear your heart and lungs.
Therefore, it is important to learn how to use telemedicine safely:
What is Telemedicine?
Telemedicine is sometimes used interchangeably with the term ’telehealth’.
Both describe a wide range of services where doctors may interact with other healthcare professionals, providers, caregivers, and/or patients virtually i.e. over a distance with the use of information communication technologies (ICT) such as video, audio or text.
These interactions may occur for various reasons, ranging from: Administrative (e.g. telesupport – scheduling appointments, and telecollaboration – coordinating patient care across doctors, healthcare professionals, and providers), to
– scheduling appointments, and – coordinating patient care across doctors, healthcare professionals, and providers), to Clinical (e.g. teleconsultation – assessing, diagnosing, treating and/or managing patients, and telemonitoring – remote patient monitoring).
In recent times, teleconsultation between doctors and patients has become more prevalent: more providers are offering teleconsultation options, and more patients are becoming familiar and comfortable with the modality.
To ensure patient safety and welfare, MOH has introduced a Voluntary Listing of Direct Telemedicine Service Providers to help patients make an informed choice when selecting a telemedicine service provider.
How to prepare for a Teleconsultation & What to expect during a Teleconsultation?
You may consider using teleconsultation for most non-urgent conditions/symptoms and for doctor-directed follow-up care.
However, you need to do so safely: Check if your regular doctor or healthcare provider offers teleconsultation Your regular doctor or healthcare provider knows your or your loved ones’ medical history best, and ideally should manage both your virtual and in-person care.
Check if they are found on the MOH’s Telemedicine Voluntary Listing.
Listed providers are aware of the risks of teleconsultation, have put in place mitigations to address these risks and agree to comply with safe practice guidelines.
Refer to the patient notifications on your provider’s website or app – this will help you decide if teleconsultation is right for your condition/symptom Not all symptoms/conditions can be managed over teleconsultation.
Your provider will post/provide the key patient notifications before the teleconsultation to advise if this modality is right for your condition/symptom.
Your provider will post/provide the key patient notifications before the teleconsultation to advise if this modality is right for your condition/symptom.
Read these notifications carefully.
You may need to see your provider in-person for your current medical issue, if teleconsultation is not suitable.
You may need to see your provider in-person for your current medical issue, if teleconsultation is not suitable.
Always check with your doctor if you remain unsure whether teleconsultation is suitable for you.
Prepare yourself or your loved ones for the teleconsultation Prepare your medical information.
Make sure you can describe your current health conditions, symptoms, medications, allergies, and recent admissions/treatments.
Make sure you can describe your current health conditions, symptoms, medications, allergies, and recent admissions/treatments.
Get comfortable with the technology.
Familiarise yourself with the website or app used for the teleconsultation.
Ask your provider, loved ones, friends, or neighbours if you need help.
Familiarise yourself with the website or app used for the teleconsultation.
Ask your provider, loved ones, friends, or neighbours if you need help.
Choose a quiet, bright, private space with good internet connectivity.
This maybe a bedroom or a private meeting room.
Face a light source, so your face can be clearly seen.
Use Wi-Fi instead of mobile data, for a more stable connection.
This maybe a bedroom or a private meeting room.
Face a light source, so your face can be clearly seen.
Use Wi-Fi instead of mobile data, for a more stable connection.
Prepare to verify your identity.
Your doctor/provider will verify your identity to ensure they are treating the right person - you may be asked to show your photo identification (e.g. NRIC/EP/WP) or through a SingPass link on the provider’s website/app.
Your doctor/provider will verify your identity to ensure they are treating the right person - you may be asked to show your photo identification (e.g. NRIC/EP/WP) or through a SingPass link on the provider’s website/app.
Share your current location.
You will need to provide your current location at the start of the teleconsultation in case emergency services need to be directed to you.
Use ‘live’ video unless directed otherwise While phone calls and text messages may be convenient, ‘live’ video consultation helps the doctor make a more accurate assessment and diagnosis.
Only use phone calls or text messages if the doctor/provider instructs you to do so.
Go for an in-person consultation if your doctor’s assessment is that you require one The doctor may need to physically examine you or your loved ones, measure vital signs or order tests to better assess and diagnose the conditions and symptoms.
What about Medical Certificates and Medications?
A doctor may issue medical certificates (MCs) and/or prescribe medications after a teleconsultation, just as with an in-person consultation.
MCs: MCs will only be offered on proper medical ground arrived through good clinical assessment.
These may be in the form of scanned MCs or digital certificates (e.g. DigiMC).
Medications: Similarly, medications will only be prescribed when needed.
Restrictions: There are strict rules around the prescribing and delivery of some medications (e.g. controlled drugs and medications with addictive potential).
Follow your doctor/provider’s guidance to reduce misuse of these medications.
There are strict rules around the prescribing and delivery of some medications (e.g. controlled drugs and medications with addictive potential).
Follow your doctor/provider’s guidance to reduce misuse of these medications.
Counselling:
All medications must be accompanied by medication counselling by the doctor/provider.
Always ask your doctor if you are unclear about your medications.
All medications must be accompanied by medication counselling by the doctor/provider.
Always ask your doctor if you are unclear about your medications.
Delivery/Collection:
Providers may deliver the medication to you, or direct you to collect it from their clinic or specific pharmacies.
Providers will not provide you with a digital prescription, to reduce the errant use of the prescription.
What to do when problems arise?
If you face issues or have feedback on your teleconsultation experience, please contact your provider to clarify your concerns first.
If the issues persist or if you feel that the provider was practising unsafely, please submit the details to us through this form.
Bleeding In Joints A Common Symptom Of Haemophilia: Here's How To Prevent Joint Degeneration
Bleeding In Joints A Common Symptom Of Haemophilia: Preventing Joint Degeneration
Joint injury (haemophilia arthropathy) is the most common haemophilia consequence.
Here's how to prevent the progression of chronic joint disease.
Joint injury (haemophilia arthropathy) is the most common haemophilia consequence.
Prophylaxis has been shown to reduce joint bleeding and prevent joint damage.
In patients with haemophilia, regular replacement therapy with clotting factor concentrates (prophylaxis), is beneficial in preventing recurrent bleeding episodes in joints and muscles.
Despite this progress, intra-articular and intramuscular bleeding continue to be a common clinical symptom of the condition.
Each joint bleed should be treated as soon as possible to avoid chronic joint illness, functional impairment, and disability, as synovium, bone, cartilage, and blood vessel changes all play a role in the development of haemophilic arthropathy.
Joint bleeding tends to repeat if not treated properly, creating a vicious cycle that must be halted to avoid the development of persistent synovitis and degenerative arthritis.
Early, vigorous prophylaxis with factor replacement therapies, as well as elective operations such as restorative physical therapy, analgesia, aspiration, synovectomy, and orthopaedic surgery, are all effective ways to avoid and manage haemophilic arthropathy.
TRENDING NOW
Chronic Joint Disease Prevention
Many people, particularly the elderly, were not aware of the benefit of using factor replacement medications to treat their bleeding early and effectively.
As a result, the majority of people have target joints, and many of them have severe joint disease.
Haemophilia arthropathy has a physical and emotional impact on patients, affecting their stride, physical abilities, body image, relationships, masculinity perceptions, feelings of vulnerability, and time away from school and work.
Chronic pain is also a symptom of arthropathy.
The related impairments and discomfort from joint illness have become significant concerns for many people as this demographic matures.
Primary prophylaxis should be recommended
Recommended for children to avoid recurring joint bleeding
Initiated prior to a second or third episode of joint bleeding (hemarthrosis) in cases of severe haemophilia
Reduces the incidence of joint bleeding and chronic joint illness
Treat the haemorrhage as soon as it appears
The most critical step in lowering the risk of chronic joint disease is to treat bleeding as soon as it occurs.
Prior to the appearance of pain, oedema, or restricted motion, treatment must be completed.
The goal is to halt the bleeding before the synovium is damaged by blood collection in the joint area.
During the acute period of a bleed, splinting can be used to immobilize the injured joint for a brief time.
In addition, crutches or other assistive devices might be utilized to rest an afflicted joint during this time.
Patients should be encouraged to resume routine activities gradually.
You may like to read
Muscle atrophy can develop after a haemorrhage causing pain, oedema, and limited motion before activities return to normal.
Increased muscle strength, range of motion, and balance are all benefits of physical therapy.
The physical therapist can assist in assessing the musculoskeletal system and functional limitations, as well as determining the best therapy options.
Promote a healthy body weight
Stronger muscles can protect joints from harm
Maintaining a healthy weight may be a crucial step in avoiding joint illness
Routine physical therapy exams and careful monitoring of a patient's weight and BMI can assist a patient build a strategy for overall fitness and joint function maintenance
Perform physical examinations
A routine evaluation by a physician, nurse, or physical therapist can help with the physical assessment of joint status.
The following items are included in a joint evaluation:
Patient's medical history
Motion-capacity
Circumference of the joints or muscular girth
Muscle endurance
X-rays of the joint anatomy or additional diagnostic imaging if any abnormalities are discovered
In some circumstances, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be necessary
(The article is contributed by Dr Narayan Hulse, Director - Department of Orthopedics, Bone & Joint Surgery, Fortis Hospitals, Bannerghatta Road, Bengaluru)
A recent study published in the International Journal of Infectious Diseases analyzed the evolution of the post-coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) condition for up to two years post-onset.
Study: Trajectories of the evolution of post COVID-19 condition, up to two years after symptoms onset.
Image Credit: AriyaJ/Shutterstock.com
Background
Most individuals with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection recover from the illness.
Still, some report symptoms beyond 4-12 weeks post-infection, a condition termed long COVID or post-COVID-19 condition.
Fatigue, dyspnea, altered taste or smell, cognitive disturbances, and chest pain are the most common symptoms.
Most longitudinal studies described the prevalence of patients with symptoms at specific time points post-infection without identifying or defining distinct patient subgroups.
Only a few studies have assessed the heterogeneity of this condition, focusing on the presence of symptom clusters.
Specifically, clustering was based on the similarities in symptoms and clinical presentation of patients instead of evolution over time.
About the study
In the present study, researchers evaluated whether distinct evolutionary trajectories of the post-COVID-19 condition could be identified.
They obtained data from an e-cohort of over 50,000 French patients with chronic conditions, followed up through self-reported outcome or experience measurements.
A long COVID cohort was established within this e-cohort in December 2020.
The team included all adults in the cohort who had suspected or confirmed COVID-19 and at least one of the 53 symptoms within three months of onset that linger for at least two months.
Individuals lacking the date of symptom onset were excluded.
Participants were instructed to complete periodical questionnaires, and they self-reported the symptom onset date.
Patients were considered to be in remission if they reported having no symptoms in three successive questionnaires.
The primary outcome was the long COVID-19 symptom tool score, which assessed 53 symptoms.
Latent class mixed modeling was used to identify trajectories in symptom evolution over time.
The robustness of the model was examined using the numerical sampling method.
Findings
The study included 2,197 long COVID patients, predominately females (79%), with a median age of 46.
Most participants (90%) were enrolled before June 7, 2021, when SARS-CoV-2 Alpha was the predominant variant in France.
Patients were followed up for a median of 291 days.
Overall, 10,799 measurements were obtained.
Seventy-seven patients reported reinfection; 141 patients were considered to be in remission.
The researchers observed three trajectories – 1) high persistent symptoms, 2) rapidly decreasing symptoms, and 3) slowly decreasing symptoms.
Ninety-four patients had high scores at symptom onset with no or little change in symptoms.
These patients with highly persistent symptoms often reported bradycardia, arrhythmia, palpitations, tachycardia, paresthesia, sweating, heat or cold intolerance, phonophobia, and photophobia within the first year of symptom onset.
Daily relapses were reported by half of these patients, which was consistent at 18 months post-onset.
Less than weekly relapses were reported by 4% and 10% of these subjects at symptom onset and 18 months post-onset, respectively.
There were 104 patients with moderate scores at symptom onset who exhibited a decrease in symptoms.
These subjects were likelier to report back pain, lower back pain, neck pain, and diarrhea in the first year of onset.
Less than weekly relapses increased to 75% after 18 months.
Most participants (90.8%) with a low score exhibited a slow improvement in symptoms over time.
Less than weekly relapses were reported by 11% and 30% of these patients at symptom onset and after 18 months, respectively.
Results were similar for the subgroup of patients with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19.
Older individuals, current smokers, subjects with systemic diseases, and those without functional diseases were likelier to have highly persistent symptoms than those with slowly decreasing symptoms.
Current smokers and those without functional diseases were more likely to have rapidly decreasing symptoms than those with slowly reducing symptoms.
Older patients and participants with systemic diseases were less likely to have rapidly reduced symptoms.
Conclusions
Taken together, the researchers identified three trajectories of the evolution of the post-COVID-19 condition.
Most patients (nearly 91%) exhibited a much slower symptom improvement over time.
Most subjects were recruited when the wild-type strain and the Alpha variant circulated.
Despite the small number of individuals infected during the Omicron wave, none exhibited highly persistent symptoms.
Further studies should explore the association of these trajectories with biological and clinical markers.
REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) and autonomic dysfunction (dysautonomia), two types of nonmotor Parkinson’s disease symptoms, were significant predictors of anxiety in Parkinson’s patients over a three-year study.
More than half (57%) of patients in in the study met the clinical criteria for anxiety at some point, underscoring its prevalence among people with the neurodegenerative disease.
“Future research should confirm the direction and mechanisms underlying these relationships, including the potential for anxiety symptom reduction through treatment for RBD and dysautonomia,” the researchers wrote.
The study, “ Predictors of anxiety in Parkinson’s disease: results from a 3‑year longitudinal cohort study ,” was published in Neurological Sciences.
Recommended Reading Patients’ Depression Often Carries Over to Care Partners
Anxiety is a common nonmotor symptom of Parkinson’s, occurring in nearly half of patients at some point in their lives.
It can lead to worse emotional well-being, impaired daily functioning, and quality of life declines, all of which can contribute to burdens on patients and their caregivers.
While risk factors for developing anxiety have been proposed, only a couple longitudinal analyses have been done and the predictors aren’t well established.
“Understanding predictors of anxiety symptoms in [Parkinson’s] may help us to identify patients at risk for anxiety disorders,” the researchers wrote, noting symptom burden could be reduced by interventions that targeted “modifiable predictors” of anxiety.
Prevalence, predictors of anxiety in Parkinson’s
Researchers at the University of Virginia investigated the prevalence and predictors of anxiety symptoms in Parkinson’s patients over three years.
A total of 105 participants with Parkinson’s, but without a clinical diagnosis of dementia, were recruited from the university’s outpatient movement disorders clinic starting in March 2013, with evaluations lasting until September 2019.
The patients (62 men, 43 women; mean age 67.8) had been living with the disease for a median of just under five years.
Patients completed a baseline visit at the study’s start and up to three follow-ups, each about a year apart.
At each visit, they completed assessments that covered motor, psychiatric and cognitive symptoms.
Anxiety symptoms, assessed by the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) questionnaire, were the primary outcome of interest.
A higher BAI score generally reflects greater anxiety, with a score of 12 or more indicating a clinical anxiety disorder in Parkinson’s.
At baseline, the mean BAI score was 10.8, below the cutoff for anxiety.
A total of 40 patients met the criteria for an anxiety disorder at that time.
The mean BAI score increased each year, reaching a mean of 13.64 among the 67 patients who completed the three-year follow-up.
Overall, 60 (57%) met the criteria for an anxiety disorder at some point.
Indicators of RBD and dysautonomia were significant independent predictors of anxiety over time in final statistical analyses.
Both have been linked to anxiety in Parkinson’s previously, the researchers said.
Dysautonomia refers to abnormalities in the autonomic nervous system, which controls involuntary bodily processes such as heart rate and sweating, leading to gastrointestinal problems, sexual dysfunction, and abnormal heartbeat, among other symptoms.
RBD is a type of sleep disorder wherein patients physically act out behaviors during dreaming, something that’s suppressed during healthy sleep.
For every unit increase on the REM Sleep Behavior Disorder Screening Questionnaire (RBDSQ) — reflecting more signs of RBD — a 0.05 point BAI increase was seen.
“In practice, clinicians may consider prioritizing anxiety screening for newly diagnosed [Parkinson’s] patients with RBD,” the researchers wrote, adding that “treatment for RBD may help to reduce anxiety symptoms in people with [Parkinson’s].”
Scores on the Scales for Outcomes in Parkinson’s-Autonomic Dysfunction (SCOPA-AUT) questionnaire were also linked to BAI.
For every one unit increase in the SCOPA-AUT — reflecting more autonomic symptoms — BAI scores increased by 0.043.
The BAI and SCOPA-AUT assess for some similar symptoms, such as dizziness and lightheadedness, that can be signs of anxiety as well as autonomic dysfunction, making it difficult to untangle the two.
Nonetheless, “treatment for autonomic dysregulation can improve self-reported anxiety symptoms,” the researchers wrote.
Other clinical factors, including cognitive function, motor impairments, and antidepressant use were not significantly associated with anxiety in the final statistical analyses.
Cognitive impairment has been previously linked to anxiety, and as a result, this relationship “should be re-examined in future studies,” the researchers wrote.
The researchers noted future studies should seek to replicate their findings with additional diagnostic measures and evaluate the effects of interventions targeting these anxiety-predictors on anxiety symptoms.
During the menopause transition, women may experience gastrointestinal (GI) issues such as indigestion, nausea, or bloating as well as traditional menopausal symptoms such as hot flashes and insomnia.
A new study, published December 6 in Menopause, the journal of the North American Menopause Society (NAMS), assessed a possible connection between race and ethnicity, the stage a woman is in during menopausal transition, and the severity of gastrointestinal issues.
They determined that an association does exist.
RELATED: 7 Ways to Get Rid of Bloating After a Big Meal
Study Looked at Midlife Women in 4 Racial and Ethnic Groups
This secondary analysis looked at data from 1,051 women ages 40 to 60 from two internet-based studies on midlife women’s health issues.
The women came from four different ethnic or racial groups: Hispanic, non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic African American, and non-Hispanic Asian.
They were also in three different stages: pre-menopause, perimenopause, and post-menopause.
The team controlled for covariates such as sociodemographic characteristics (age, education, marital status, family income, and employment), and health-related characteristics (body mass index or BMI, perceived health status, and diagnosed GI diseases).
Sherri-Ann Burnett-Bowie, MD, MPH, the director of multicultural affairs at the Massachusetts General Hospital department of medicine in Boston, who was not involved in the study, notes that the investigators appropriately discussed, though did not measure, how cultural influences such as diet or perceptions of pain could contribute to the observed racial or ethnic differences.
Additionally, she says, cultural differences in comfort level with reporting symptoms may have contributed to the study’s findings.
(Study participants self-reported their symptoms.)
More Digestive Problems Reported by Non-Hispanic White Women
The researchers concluded that race and ethnicity does have an association with GI issues around menopause.
With age, all groups experienced increased digestive symptoms, in varying degrees of severity and number, but as they reached post-menopause, there was a separation.
Non-Hispanic Asian women had significantly fewer symptoms overall and lower total severity than the three other racial or ethnic groups.
In contrast, non-Hispanic white women experienced higher severity of symptoms, especially when it came to nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, and loss of appetite.
Hispanics were more likely to have higher severity scores for constipation, weight gain, and bloating, whereas non-Hispanic African Americans were more likely to have higher levels of weight loss.
RELATED: 4 Natural Ways to Manage Constipation From IBS
What Causes Bloating, Weight Gain, and Other GI Symptoms Around Menopause?
While the association between menopause status and GI symptoms has been established, the cause is not generally agreed upon.
The researchers attribute it to the decrease in estrogen hormone levels and an increase in cortisol hormone levels.
But Dr. Burnett-Bowie points out that research published in the journal Women’s Midlife Health in August 2019 found decreased abdominal pain with the menopause transition and increasing age, which is counter to the present study.
If Diarrhea, Constipation, Other Symptoms Persist or Get Worse, See a Doctor
If you are having more in the way of diarrhea, bloating, nausea, or stomach pain, follow up with your physician.
It could be a complication of menopause, but it could also be a sign of other disease.
“Everyone should be getting colonoscopies from the age of 50,” urges Burnett-Bowie, who is one of the principal investigators in the SWAN Study (the Study of Women’s Health Across the Nation).
RELATED:
What’s the Difference Between Acid Reflux and GERD?
Need for Long-Term Study to Better Understand Progression of GI Issues
“I think this is definitely an important study.
However, the results, while provocative, are just exploratory in nature,” notes Burnett-Bowie, adding that another limitation of this study is that the women were studied cross-sectionally, not longitudinally.
That means that the team studied different women in all three groups instead of following one group as it passed through all three stages.
“Further study needs to be done that follows the same women over those three time points and assesses their gastrointestinal symptoms to determine if the symptoms are worsening, staying the same, or improving,” says Burnett-Bowie.
"This study highlights significant associations between GI symptoms and menopause status, with post-menopausal women generally reporting a greater number of symptoms and more severe symptoms.
It also shows important racial/ethnic differences in GI symptom reporting, similar to what has been shown with menopause symptoms.
Additional study is needed to confirm these findings and to determine optimal management strategies for midlife women with new, bothersome GI symptoms," said Stephanie Faubion, MD, the medical director of NAMS, in a press release.
Death rates from acute COVID infections have fallen at this point in the pandemic, but there’s still a lot of worry about long COVID.
And if you’ve been looking at recent headlines, you might assume that long COVID should very much be a concern for the average person today.
A new study is out in the prestigious journal Nature Medicine that appears, at first glance, to bolster that view.
Headlines about it say it shows that long COVID is worse, on a population level, than heart disease or cancer, and that it can continue to cause issues two years after the initial infection.
Long COVID, which the World Health Organization defines as unexplained symptoms that are still a worry more than three months after the initial infection, is a public health concern.
And yes, there is a chance that you will get COVID and have lingering symptoms.
But what this study has to say about long COVID risk for most people is actually reassuring.
Here’s one way to summarize what the study shows: It compared people who had a record of a COVID-19 infection in 2020 with a control group, who had never been diagnosed with the disease, and found that years later people who’d had COVID-19 were still at an increased risk of a range of issues.
Specifically, the researchers found, the risks of 25 out of 80 serious conditions were elevated even in people who had not been hospitalized with their initial COVID-19 infection when compared with an uninfected control.
People who had been hospitalized saw even higher risks.
Advertisement
There are a few important things to keep in mind.
First, this paper looked at what’s known as the U.S. Veterans Health Administration cohort.
This is a group of generally older, mostly male patients who get health care from the VHA, and who are, on balance, much less healthy than your average person.
Any issues seen in this cohort are very hard to generalize to the rest of the population.
The paper also looked at people who were infected prior to the widespread availability of vaccines.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Advertisement
Further, to be included in the study, participants had to seek medical help, which means that any analysis on this data will be biased.
The rate of hospitalization for COVID-19 was much higher than you’d see in the general population.
By definition, people who had mild infections and didn’t need help from the health care system were less likely to be included in this cohort.
This means that the paper’s estimates of post-infection issues are likely to be exaggerated.
(On the other hand, the authors did not take into account potential unrecorded infections in the control group, which means that some people in this group may also have been experiencing long COVID symptoms.)
Advertisement
So, what does the study actually show?
It shows that there is a large risk of long-term issues for people who have been hospitalized with COVID-19.
This is entirely expected.
If you get sick enough with any disease to the point where you require hospitalization, you are almost guaranteed some measure of long-term issues.
Getting really sick is bad for your health.
For people in the study who weren’t hospitalized with their initial infection, the situation was quite different.
There was a large increased risk of issues such as heart attacks and susceptibility to other respiratory disease that happened in the first three months after being infected.
But after that, the long-term problems associated with COVID-19 dropped off rapidly.
Two years after infection, the non-hospitalized people with COVID-19 were experiencing levels of various diseases that were virtually indistinguishable from the control.
Advertisement
Advertisement
To put the risk of long COVID in context, let’s look at a few examples of these risks from the non-hospitalized group.
(A technical note: The authors used a metric called Disability-Adjusted Life Years, but for simplicity, I’ve converted that back into absolute counts.)
Between 18 and 24 months after infection, about 18 in every 10,000 people in the control group developed diabetes.
In the COVID-19 cohort, that figure was 20 for every 10,000 people.
For fatigue—one of the most common issues associated with long COVID—the numbers were 26 in 10,000 for the control vs. 31 in 10,000 in the COVID-19 arm.
Advertisement
Related From Slate Long COVID Treatment Research Is Stuck in a Frustrating Catch-22 Read More
This study measured illness by looking at how many people received diagnostic codes—and to get a diagnostic code, you’d have to actually go to a doctor and get diagnosed, which people don’t always do.
That means that these numbers are potentially lower than the true figures of these diseases in this cohort.
At the same time, they are likely higher compared with the true figures for the rest of the population due to the nature of the people included in the study.
Advertisement
But these numbers do still give some context as to the rates of these issues in people infected with COVID-19.
At a population level, long COVID represents an elevated risk that could be meaningful: An extra two cases of diabetes per 10,000 people over 60 would be quite a few people nationally.
At an individual level, however, they are much less alarming.
The chance that you will be one of—maybe—five people out of many thousands who have long-term fatigue two years after COVID-19 is quite low.
It certainly isn’t as worrying as the health issues posed by heart disease or cancer.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ultimately, this study does not contradict a broader picture of long COVID that is emerging.
If you look at the population-wide rates of people reporting long-lasting issues associated with COVID-19, they have been on the decline for some time.
This is likely because of vaccination and past infection.
Immunity makes future infections much less severe, and at this point the vast majority of the world has several layers of immunity thanks in particular to our excellent COVID-19 vaccines.
Advertisement
None of this is to say that long COVID isn’t a nasty problem for many people.
I personally know several people suffering tremendously years after infection.
There are still tens of thousands of people likely disabled in the U.S. due to their coronavirus infections.
For some of these people, the issues may be lifelong.
Advertisement
Long COVID is a serious issue, and we are rightly putting a fair bit of effort into researching it.
That being said, I find the new evidence quite reassuring.
As the severity of COVID-19 drops due to our ever-growing levels of immunity, the risks from the disease, including long COVID, drop as well.
And for people who have relatively mild initial infections—which is, at this point, the vast majority of those who get the disease, especially if they’ve recently had a booster—the risks are generally very small.
Although COVID-19 will remain a public health problem for years to come, and possibly forever, it is no longer an everyday fear for many people.
SINGAPORE - Over four in five Singapore residents - 83.5 per cent - can recognise and correctly identify the symptoms of diabetes, but younger people tend to be less knowledgeable about the condition.
Those aged 35 and above are about twice as likely to correctly recognise diabetes symptoms compared with those aged between 18 and 34, according to the results of a study by several public health institutions here released on Tuesday (April 20).
This gap in knowledge about diabetes among younger people is a "crucial area" that needs to be addressed, said Professor Chong Siow Ann, who is the vice-chairman of the Medical Board (Research) at the Institute of Mental Health (IMH) and the principal investigator of the study.
"This is important as the modifiable risk factors are related to lifestyle and dietary habits, and these healthy patterns ought to be established early in life as prevention is far more effective if it is done early," said Prof Chong.
The study also found that respondents who are Malay, women or those diagnosed with diabetes were more likely to recognise diabetes compared with those who are Chinese, men or those without a history of diabetes respectively.
Prof Chong noted that another important finding was why Singapore residents do not go for diabetes screening.
Their reasons can be addressed through initiatives, he said, so as to reduce the prevalence of diabetes and improve public health outcomes.
Almost half of the respondents - 44.8 per cent - said they did not know where to get free screening.
Procrastination was cited by almost a third of respondents - 32.2 per cent - as a reason they have avoided a screening.
More than a quarter - 26 per cent - said they did not see the point of going for screening without subsequent follow-up or explanation from a healthcare provider.
The study was a collaboration by the IMH, Khoo Teck Puat Hospital, National Healthcare Group Polyclinics, and the National University of Singapore's Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health.
It was funded by the National Medical Research Council under the Health Services Research Grant.
The study began in 2018 and involved 2,895 Singapore citizens and permanent residents aged 18 and above.
It included a mix of people with and without diabetes.
Respondents were given a short description of symptoms affecting a hypothetical person to determine if they could recognise them as symptoms of diabetes.
British Heart Foundation: Understanding blood clots
Blood clots can form anywhere in the body where the blood has thickened due to an injury Unfortunately, approximately one in three cases are misdiagnosed, putting hundreds of thousands of patients in peril of death.
Recognising the classic symptoms of pulmonary embolism could heighten the chances of curative treatment.
The Iranian journal Emergency, in 2014, stressed the importance of a well-timed diagnosis and management of pulmonary embolism for decreasing mortality.
The authors of the report explained: “Because of the lack of […] signs and symptoms, the diagnosis remains vague."
They continued: “The classic symptoms of dyspnea, tachypnea, and decreased oxygen saturation may occur in up to 92 percent of cases."
According to Medicine Plus, Tachypnea is a medical term used by healthcare providers to describe breathing that is too fast.
READ MORE: Man, 42, experienced pain in one leg due to severe blood clot
Blood clots in the lungs can cause rapid breathing
The term refers to fast, shallow breathing from lung disease or other medical causes, and differs from hyperventilation, where breathing is rapid but deep.
Dyspnea, which describes a tightening in the chest, air hunger, difficulty breathing and a feeling of suffocation, can occur within seconds of an embolism forming.
“[...] Because of numerous atypical presentations, physicians must focus on other clinical features to include or exclude them as possible diagnoses," added the authors of the report.
In prior research, abdominal pain has been observed in around seven percent of patients with pulmonary embolisms.
DON’T MISS: ‘Almost everyone with advanced cancer’ reports the same symptom
[INSIGHT]
The popular drink that could increase mouth cancer risk [INFORMER] 'It's a lottery whether you will survive': A&E doctor's chilling warning
[LATEST]
Trending
READ MORE Woman hit by blood clots after suffering from Charley horse pain Other symptoms that may accompany abdominal pain are nausea, diarrhoea and vomiting often accompany abdominal pain.
Roughly 30 to 40 percent of blood clot cases go unnoticed, however, since they do not manifest with typical symptoms.
In fact, a great number of patients fail to recognise that they have a deep vein clot until it causes a more serious condition.
The main danger with blood clots deep inside the vein is that they can break off and travel through the bloodstream.
READ MORE: Bouts of heartburn could be hinting at blood clots - what to look for
SUBSCRIBE Invalid email We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you.
This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding.
You can unsubscribe at any time.
Read our Privacy Policy
Some patients with blood clots experience no symptoms at all
READ MORE Bouts of heartburn could be hinting at blood clots - what to look for The condition only proves fatal when blood clots reach the lungs, as the rest of the organs rely on them for oxygen.
Doctor Andrei Kindzelski, an NIH blood disease expert explained that before a person suffers pulmonary embolism, they may experience swelling, pain, warmth and redness of the leg.
How to avoid blood clots Taking steps to reduce the chances of a blood clot forming in the veins can help people avoid potentially life-threatening health problems.
The most crucial step in avoiding pulmonary embolism is preventing blood clots in the deep veins of the legs.
Swelling in the leg can be a sign of deep vein thrombosis
A new omicron subvariant is spreading in Florida with an odd potential symptom: conjunctivitis.
Helix, a surveillance company that tracks emerging variants across the nation for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, discovered the variant known as XBB.1.16 or arcturus makes up as much as 5% of new COVID cases in Florida.
Arcturus appears to be more contagious than other subvariants, and doctors are reporting the strain may be linked to a rise in red itchy eyes.
Health experts say it’s unlikely conjunctivitis would be the only symptom associated with a COVID-19 infection, and note that allergy season is here, too.
However, doctors are reporting that along with cough and cold symptoms associated with COVID, children are coming in with “itchy conjunctivitis with sticky eyes, not seen in earlier waves.”
Conjunctivitis is a swelling of the thin layer that lines the white part of the eye and can cause discharge, crusting, and cause the whites of the eyes to turn red or pink.
Arcturus was first detected in January in India, where it has triggered a majority of new COVID-19 cases and has particularly impacted the nation’s youth.
The World Health Organization has flagged it as a variant to watch.
Florida is one of seven states in the country where arcturus is spreading, according to Helix.
Arcturus was responsible for 9.6% of new infections for the week ending April 22, according to CDC estimates.
That percentage is up from about 6% of cases the week before and about 3% two weeks earlier.
Public health experts believe arcturus’ percentage will increase in the coming weeks in Florida and other parts of the country, possibly setting it up to become the next dominant coronavirus strain in the United States.
However, cases thus far haven’t caused healthcare providers to be concerned about an uptick in severe illnesses, hospitalizations or deaths in the weeks ahead.
Overall in Florida, COVID is circulating at relatively low levels.
Florida reported only 7,382 cases for the week of April 7, down from 17,329 in early February.
More than 7.5 million people in Florida have been confirmed with coronavirus since the start of the pandemic.
By now, at least 16 million people in Florida have had at least one dose of a COVID vaccine.
Last week the CDC recommended that people ages 65 and older or with weakened immune systems get a second bivalent mRNA booster.
Sun Sentinel health reporter Cindy Goodman can be reached at cgoodman@sunsentinel.com.
In a new study on mice, Johns Hopkins Medicine researchers report that using MRI scans to measure blood volume in the brain can serve as a noninvasive way to potentially track the progress of gene editing therapies for early-stage Huntington’s disease, a neurodegenerative disorder that attacks brain cells.
The researchers say that by identifying and treating the mutation known to cause Huntington’s disease with this type of gene therapy, before a patient starts showing symptoms, it may slow progression of the disease.
The findings of the study were published May 27 in the journal Brain.
“What’s exciting about this study is the opportunity to identify a reliable biomarker that can track the potential success of genetic therapies before patients start manifesting symptoms,” says Wenzhen Duan, M.D., Ph.D., director of the translational neurobiology laboratory and professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
“Such a biomarker could facilitate the development of new treatments, and help us determine the best time to begin them.”
Huntington’s disease is a rare genetic disorder caused by a single defective gene, dubbed “huntingtin,” on human chromosome 4.
The gene is passed on from parents to children — if one parent has the mutation, each child has a 50% chance of inheriting it.
Huntington’s disease has no cure and can lead to emotional disturbances, loss of intellectual abilities and uncontrolled movements.
Thanks to genetic testing, people can know if they have the disease long before symptoms arise, which typically happens in their 40s or 50s.
For the study, Duan and her team collaborated with colleagues from Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, who developed a novel method to more precisely measure the blood volume in the brain by using advanced functional MRI scans.
With the scans, they can map the trajectory of blood flow in small blood vessels called arterioles in the brains of mice engineered to carry the human huntingtin gene mutation that mirror the early stages of Huntington’s disease in humans.
Duan notes that there are many known metabolic changes in the brains of people with Huntington’s disease, and those changes initiate a brain blood volume response in the disease’s early stages.
Blood volume is a key marker for oxygen supply to brain cells, which in turn supplies energy for the neurons to function.
But with Huntington’s disease, the brain’s arteriolar blood volume is dramatically diminished, which makes the neurons deteriorate because of lack of oxygen as the disease progresses.
In a series of experiments, the researchers suppressed the mutation in the huntingtin gene in mice, using a gene-editing technology known as CRISPR — a tool for editing genomes that allows the alteration of a DNA sequence to modify gene function.
Then, they used the MRI scanning technique and other tests to track the brain function over time both of mice with the huntingtin mutation, in which they edited out the faulty gene sequence, and a control group of mice in which the faulty gene was unedited.
The experiments assessed abnormalities in the trajectory of arteriolar blood volumes in mouse brains with the Huntington’s disease mutation at 3, 6 and 9 months of age (pre-symptom stage, beginning of symptoms and post-symptom stage, respectively).
The researchers looked at whether suppression of the mutant huntingtin gene in the neurons could normalize altered arteriolar blood volumes in the pre-symptom stage, and whether reduced expression of the huntingtin gene at the pre-symptom stage could delay or even prevent development of symptoms.
“Overall, our data suggest that the cerebral arteriolar blood volume measure may be a promising noninvasive biomarker for testing new therapies in patients with Huntington’s who are yet to show symptoms of the disease,” says Duan.
“Introducing treatment in this early stage may have long-lasting benefits.”
When the researchers mapped the trajectory of cerebral blood volume and conducted an assortment of brain and motor tests in the mice at 3 months of age, and compared the test to those of the control group, they observed no significant differences except in cerebral blood volumes.
However, Huntington’s symptoms in the mice with the huntingtin gene started at 6 months of age and progressively worsened at 9 months, suggesting that altered cerebral blood volume occurs before motor symptoms and atrophy of the brain cells — typical traits of the disease.
The cerebral blood volume changes were also found to be similar to those observed in patients with Huntington’s disease before they start manifesting symptoms, which declines with the start of symptoms and while the disease progresses over time.
The researchers also analyzed the structure of the arteriole blood vessels in the brains of mice with the mutant huntingtin gene at 3 and at 9 months of age and found no differences in the numbers of vessel segments in the pre-symptom stage.
However, they observed that smaller blood vessels had an increased density and reduced diameter, which may be a vascular response to compensate for the impaired neuronal brain function.
This might suggest, the researchers conclude, that impaired vascular structure leads to lowered arteriole blood volumes and possibly compromised ability to compensate for the loss in the symptom stage.
Considering that Huntington’s disease symptoms depend not only on brain cell loss but also on how neurons deteriorate, the researchers set out to determine if suppressing the huntingtin gene during the pre-symptom stage in mice could delay or even prevent disease progression.
To do that, the researchers introduced the altered huntingtin gene to the neurons in mice at 2 months of age and evaluated the outcomes at 3 months of age (when no atrophy or motor deficits were present).
Remarkably, the researchers say, the cerebral arteriolar blood volume in mice with the altered huntingtin gene was This suggests that the altered cerebral blood volume during the pre-symptom stage in mice is most likely due to neuronal changes in either activity or metabolism.
“Our findings demonstrate that significant changes in arteriolar cerebral blood volumes occur before neurons start to degenerate and symptoms begin, further supporting the idea that altered cerebrovascular function is an early stage symptom in Huntington’s disease,” says Duan.
She explains that these changes also indicate there’s a pre-symptom therapeutic window in which to test interventions.
While no animal model replicates all the symptoms of human Huntington’s disease, this research offers an alternative system to study functional changes in the pre-symptom stage, she says.
Further validation of these findings in human clinical trials would facilitate development of efficient therapeutic interventions for patients with Huntington’s disease before they start developing symptoms.
“The goal is to delay or even conceivably prevent the manifestation of Huntington’s disease altogether,” says Duan.
Along with Duan, other researchers who contributed to the work are Hongshuai Liu, Chuangchuang Zhang, Jing Jin, Liam Cheng, Qian Wu, Zhiliang Wei, Peiying Liu and Christopher Ross from Johns Hopkins, and Jiadi Xu, Xinyuan Miao, Hanzhang Lu, Peter van Zijl and Jun Hua from the Kennedy Krieger Institute and Johns Hopkins.
Self-reported prevalence of neuropsychiatric symptoms were significantly higher in patients with systemic autoimmune rheumatic diseases (SARDs) when compared with controls, and are vastly underestimated by most clinicians, according to a study published in Rheumatology.1 Investigators believe improved inter-specialty communication and better patient involvement is needed in both care and research, as research relying on guidelines and medical records may inaccurately reflect the patient’s experience of their symptoms.
Neuropsychiatric symptoms in this patient population are linked to increased mortality and morbidity, as well as reduced quality of life.
They commonly include headache, depression, anxiety, confusion, tremors, seizure, stroke, vision problems, and confusion.2
Although previous research has assessed the prevalence of usual symptoms in patients with SARDs, data exploring other potential neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as psychiatric, auditory-vestibular, and neuroophthalmological, are limited.3
“Identifying neuropsychiatric symptoms as SARD symptoms can assist in diagnosis and disease management,” wrote Melanie Sloan, PhD, Department of Public Health and Primary Care Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK, and colleagues.
“However, the diverse range of potential symptoms, limited biomarkers to assist in assessing causation, and a lack of understanding as to etiology, can inhibit identification.
Attribution is complicated by SARD patient quality of life usually being substantially adversely altered, and therefore some neuropsychiatric symptoms such as depression may have varying levels of a reactive component or be multifactorial in origin.”
The INSPIRE (Investigating Neuropsychiatric Symptom Prevalence and Impact in Rheumatology patient Experiences) project used a mixed methods approach to investigate a wider range of symptoms (n = 30), often excluded from previous literature, compare self-reported patient data with clinician estimates, and explore potential barriers to identifying these symptoms.
A pre-tested survey was distributed to patients between July 2022 and September 2022 and to clinicians in November 2022.
Data from 1853 adult patients with SARDs were compared with 463 controls and 289 clinicians.
Investigators analyzed 113 in-depth interviews (67 patients and 46 clinicians) and used the findings to create themes.
Statistical tests were conducted to compare patients and controls, clinician specialties, and 8 different SARDs, including inflammatory arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögrens, vasculitis, and polymyalgia rheumatica.
All 30 neuropsychiatric symptoms included were significantly higher in the SARD cohort when compared with controls, even after adjusting for age, gender, ethnicity, and country of residence.
More than half (57%) of patients with SARDs reported having depression and anxiety.
Other symptoms with the highest prevalence included fatigue (89%), insomnia (76%), and cognitive dysfunction (70%).
Barriers to symptom identification included: 1) limitations regarding guidelines, objective tests, knowledge, and inter-specialty cooperation; 2) invisibility, subjectivity, and the believability of symptoms; and 3) under-reporting, under-documenting, and under-eliciting.
Approximately two thirds of patients (74%) reported never or rarely being asked about mental health symptoms during clinic visits, although 4% of clinicians reported never or rarely asking patients about their mental health (P <.001).
Over 50% of patients with SARDs had never or rarely reported their mental health symptoms to a clinician, although clinicians estimated that percentage to be <10% (P <.001).
Investigators noted strengths of the study, such as incorporating a broad range of symptoms and SARDs.
The multi-disciplinary team also allowed for the prioritization of patients’ perspectives.
However, generalizability may have been limited by recall bias, self-reported diagnoses, and survey recruitment via social media.
Additionally, online surveys may exclude patients who are the most unwell and disadvantaged.
“The next stages of the INSPIRE project will investigate: attribution of neuropsychiatric symptoms, eliciting and reporting of neuropsychiatric symptoms, the impact of these symptoms on patient lives, and specific challenges and inequalities experienced by SARD patients from ethnic minorities,” investigators concluded.
References
"Right now, people start taking antibiotics like Azithromycin and Amoxiclav etc, that too without caring for done and frequency and stop it once start feeling better.
This needs to be stopped as it leads to antibiotic resistance.
Whenever there will be a real use of antibiotics, they will not work due to the resistance," the IMA’s Standing Committee for Anti-Microbial Resistance said in a statement.
The novel coronavirus, or SARS-CoV-2, is a highly contagious coronavirus that has spread worldwide since its discovery in December 2019.
The resulting illness is COVID-19, which has numerous symptoms and may also cause diarrhea.
Coronaviruses are a type of virus that can trigger illnesses in humans and some animals.
According to United Kingdom Research and Innovation, seven different types of coronavirus have been found in people, including those responsible for severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), and COVID-19 epidemics.
Keep reading to learn more about coronaviruses and diarrhea, including how to know if a person’s diarrhea is due to COVID-19 or another gastrointestinal issue.
Coronavirus resources For more advice on COVID-19 prevention and treatment, visit our coronavirus hub.
Was this helpful?
Coronavirus data All data and statistics are based on publicly available data at the time of publication.
Some information may be out of date.
Visit our coronavirus hub for the most recent information on COVID-19.
Was this helpful?
Is diarrhea a symptom of COVID-19?
Share on Pinterest Image credit: RossHelen/Getty Images People with COVID-19 report a wide range of symptoms, ranging from mild to severe.
Of these, the most common include fever, a cough, shortness of breath, and fatigue.
However, some studies show that many people with the disease also experience gastrointestinal issues such as nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea.
Sometimes, they can even occur before people develop more common signs of COVID-19, such as a fever or lower respiratory tract symptoms.
For example, one study found that around 10% of patients presented with diarrhea and nausea 1–2 days before developing fever and shortness of breath.
Some people may experience gastrointestinal issues as the only sign of COVID-19, without more common flu-like symptoms.
In one early study of 116 confirmed COVID-19 patients in the United States, 31.9% reported gastrointestinal symptoms.
Over 22% of study participants said they experienced a loss of appetite, 12% had nausea and vomiting, and 12% had diarrhea, although 89% described these symptoms as mild.
Fecal transmission There is evidence that suggests the feces of COVID‐19 patients may be able to transmit the disease.
The study also states that the feces could remain infectious even after throat swab tests indicate a person is no longer positive for the virus.
That said, other researchers are calling for more in-depth studies in order to understand whether feces genuinely contributes to virus transmission If a person has diarrhea and they suspect that it may be COVID-19 related, they should stay separated from other people as much as possible.
If possible, they should also not use the same bathroom and bedroom as other household members.
Healthcare professionals should also take extra care if they encounter feces of those with or recovered from COVID-19.
How to differentiate from other illnesses The main symptom of diarrhea is passing loose, watery stools three or more times a day or at a more frequent rate than usual for an individual.
According to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) , a person with this condition may also have one or more of the following symptoms: an urgent need to use the bathroom
cramping
loss of control of bowel movements
nausea
pain in the abdomen People with diarrhea due to some infections may also experience: bloody stools
light-headedness and dizziness
vomiting There are three types of diarrhea: Acute diarrhea is common but typically lasts 1–2 days and goes away on its own.
The NIDDK suggest there are around 179 million U.S. cases of acute diarrhea each year.
suggest there are around 179 million U.S. cases of acute diarrhea each year.
Persistent diarrhea lasts longer than 2 weeks but less than 4 weeks.
Chronic diarrhea typically lasts at least 4 weeks, but symptoms may be continual, or they could come and go.
Chronic diarrhea is triggered by different conditions than those that trigger acute diarrhea.
In many instances, doctors do not find the reason for acute diarrhea, as cases usually resolve by themselves within 4 days, so finding the cause may not be required.
Most of the time, infections, travelers’ diarrhea, or some side effects of medications may be responsible for acute diarrhea.
Diarrhea and COVID-19 Around 80% of people who contract COVID-19 will experience mild symptoms that do not requite hospital treatment.
However, if diarrhea or other gastrointestinal problems accompany any of the below symptoms, a person should self-isolate and contact a doctor or healthcare provider.
fever or chills
cough
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
fatigue
muscle or body aches
headache
new loss of taste or smell
sore throat
congestion or runny nose People with COVID-19 should also follow the latest national guidance on self-isolation.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) advise that if someone shows any of the following symptoms, they should seek emergency medical care immediately: trouble breathing
persistent pain or pressure in the chest
new confusion
inability to wake or stay awake
bluish lips or face If a person believes they have symptoms of COVID-19 or they have come into contact with someone who has this disease, they must not visit their doctor.
This could spread the virus to more people.
Instead, they should call their healthcare provider who can provide up-to-date guidance.
The World Health Organization (WHO) suggest that if a person shows symptoms that suggest COVID-19, they contact their healthcare provider and self-isolate.
If a person has concerns, they can contact their healthcare provider, who may offer advice over the phone or online.
According to the NIDDK , adults or children should see a doctor as soon as possible if they experience any of the following symptoms: diarrhea lasting more than 2 days
a fever of 102ºF or higher
frequent vomiting
severe pain in the abdomen or rectum
stools that are black and tarry or contain blood or pus
symptoms of dehydration Older adults and adults with weakened immune systems or other health conditions who have diarrhea should also contact their healthcare provider as soon as possible.
Mask recommendations The CDC recommends that people who are not fully vaccinated wear cloth face masks in indoor public settings.
If case numbers are high in the area, it may be best to wear a mask outdoors, as well.
This will help slow the spread of the virus from people who do not know that they have contracted it, including those who are asymptomatic.
Note: It is critical that surgical masks and N95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers.
Was this helpful?
In November 2021, the World Health Organization (WHO) designated COVID's Omicron variant as a 'variant of concern' (VoC), which meant that the SARs-CoV-2 strain was highly transmissible, with a higher fatality rate.
Over time, experts realized that while the new variant was extremely contagious, it was much milder than the previous COVID-19 variants including the Delta.
However, over seven months have passed since the news of the Omicron variant came to the fore and up until today, it is still dominant in many parts of the world.
With new subvariants emerging every now and then, scientists and experts have warned people against taking the variant lightly.
Recently, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) declared new Omicron variants BA.4 and BA.5 as dominant, the former accounting for nearly 16% of recent cases in the country and the latter a whopping 54% of new cases.
Furthermore, a new subvariant of Omicron has come to light in recent time, called BA.2.75, which is nicknamed Centaurus and was first detected in India in early May, according to a media report.
Amid new emerging variants, experts have highlighted another symptom - a specific pain - that could be an indicator of the Omicron variant.
Let's find out what it is
Also read: A sexual health worker shares his experience of Monkeypox: “I felt alone and the pain was unbearable”
We may earn commission from links on this page, but we only recommend products we back.
Why Trust Us?
Thought you left the pollen-packed sniffles behind when you put away your sandals and sundresses?
Think again.
Believe it or not, spring and summer aren’t the only seasons that can make you suffer.
Fall allergies are also a thing, and can be just as sneeze and snot-ridden as their seasonal predecessors.
Ahead, experts break down everything you need to know about fall allergies, including treatment and prevention tactics.
What causes fall allergies?
When you’re dealing with seasonal allergies, your immune system is trying to fight off a substance you’re sensitive to by releasing histamine, which leads to unpleasant symptoms, according to the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America (AAFA).
These irritants can include specific types of mold, pollen, and weeds, which all pick up toward the end of summer and can affect the way you feel come autumn.
Some specific allergens that are rampant in fall are:
Weeds and pollen
Balmy temperatures of late summer and early fall let much of the country hit the beach for a few extra weeks each year.
But while your spirits soar, so do ragweed and pollen counts.
“Counts usually drop significantly by the first week of September,” explains Joseph Leija, M.D., founder of the Gottlieb Allergy Count, which provides the official allergy count for the Midwest.
But when it gets rainy, grasses and weeds grow out of control depending on where you live.
This can include the following:
Ragweed
Goldenrod
Sagebrush
Mugwort
Cocklebur
Pigweed
Tumbleweed
Burning brush
Lamb’s-quarters
More weeds mean more pollen, a big cause of hay fever (a.k.a. rhinitis) , Dr. Leija explains, which affects up to 60 million Americans each year, according to the American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology .
Ragweed in particular seems to wreak havoc during the fall months, explains Purvi Parikh, M.D. , an allergist with the Allergy and Asthma Network, reaching peak levels in mid-September .
Just one ragweed plant can produce up to 1 billion pollen grains and it can travel far, especially in the Eastern and Midwestern parts of the country, the AAFA says .
Mold
Nothing looks more quintessentially autumn than leaves falling into big piles.
But once foliage starts to decay, it becomes a breeding ground for mold, Dr. Parikh says.
Breathing in spores can aggravate asthma and cause heavy breathing, wheezing, and other upper respiratory symptoms in those with mold allergies.
Damp basements are another common source of mold.
Dr. Leija suggests placing a dehumidifier downstairs—whether the rooms are finished or not—and cleaning any filters for your furnace, which could be pushing airborne mold spores into your upper floors.
Fall allergy symptoms
Once you learn to spot the below symptoms and identify your triggers, you should have no issues managing your fall allergies.
Watery, itchy, or generally irritated eyes
Runny nose or nasal congestion
Sneezing
Headaches
Rashes or hives on the skin
Itchy throat
Aggravated asthma symptoms, including coughing or wheezing
In severe cases, trouble breathing or anaphylaxis (a life-threatening allergic reaction)
It’s important to note that fall allergy symptoms are often overlooked, as they overlap with the common cold, flu , or COVID .
“Most people associate allergies with spring, and often fall allergies get mistaken for viruses and other infections due to weather getting cold,” explains Dr. Parikh.
One distinguishing factor for allergies: They do not cause a fever .
Allergy symptoms tend to be associated with “itchy symptoms” whereas the cold and flu are often indicated by body aches, stomach issues, and most notably, body temperatures over 100 degrees.
But if you’re not sure, it’s best to check with your doc, she adds.
Treatments for fall allergies
If you implement those lifestyle changes and are still struggling, Dr. Parikh suggests seeing an allergist who can confirm your allergies and create a customized treatment plan.
There are also several over-the-counter options you can try to manage symptoms, according to the AAFA , including:
Nasal corticosteroids or decongestants
These both work to minimize nasal swelling, which causes a stuffy, runny, or itchy nose.
Just note that you should limit decongestant use to a day or two, otherwise your symptoms may get worse.
Try .
Corticosteroid creams and ointments
They keep itchy rashes from getting worse.
Try .
See your doctor if you don’t see improvement within a week.
Antihistamines or mast cell stabilizers
Available in a variety of forms like tablets, liquids, and nose sprays, these are great because they block the release of histamine, so you should see an improvement in common symptoms like sneezing, itching, watery eyes, and hives.
Try .
Be sure to discuss these treatments with your allergist, who may also recommend allergy shots, prescription-strength meds, or carrying an EpiPen if your symptoms become severe.
Fall allergies management
Before resorting to a doctor’s visit, there are habits you can try to keep allergy flare-ups at bay, including:
Limit outdoor time to the evenings
“Pollen counts are highest from early morning until 10 a.m., so try to postpone your activity until later in the day,” suggests Rachna Shah, M.D., allergist and faculty member of Loyola School of Medicine.
Keep yourself and your home clean
“Mold spores and pollen can stick to everything, including hair, skin, and clothing,” Dr. Shah says.
You probably don’t even realize you’re doing it, but there’s a good chance you’re tracking irritants into the house.
So, you can wear a face mask (like these) when you rake leaves outdoors to avoid breathing in mold spores, brush or wipe down pets after walks, leave your shoes outside, and keep windows closed to limit exposure.
Can’t bear having no fresh air?
PollenTEC makes that filter dust, pollen, and exhaust soot so you can enjoy the fall breeze while it lasts.
Be consistent with medication
“It takes about two to three days for allergy medicine to kick in,” explains Dr. Leija.
And you can’t just stop when you feel better or when the pollen count in your area is low.
“Pollen counts vary so much by the weather and the barometric pressure,” he explains, so consistently taking your medication on days when numbers are low will prep you for when they surge again.
Additional reporting by Alisa Hrustic and Arielle Weg
Related Story The Best HEPA Vacuum Cleaners, Allergist Approved
7 other weird early pregnancy symptoms
If you too are trying to conceive then here 7 other weird early pregnancy symptoms, which no one usually talks about.
Holiday travel can also contribute to COVID-19 case increases, she said, noting the situation in a crowded airport where many people aren’t wearing masks.
“After a holiday, we see increases in cases because people are more likely to gather in larger groups, spend more time indoors at larger gatherings.
Those are conditions that increase the rates of SARS-CoV-2 transmission.” said Dr. Sabrina Assoumou, an assistant professor of medicine at Boston University School of Medicine and an attending physician in the section of infectious diseases at Boston Medical Center.
With Fourth of July weekend celebrations in the rearview mirror, people should keep an eye out for possible symptoms of COVID-19, experts said Tuesday.
Advertisement
“It’s definitely a time to be more vigilant,” she said.
She said she recommended that people who have been in higher-risk settings should look out for COVID-19 symptoms such as fever, runny nose, cough, and fatigue.
If symptoms develop, people should get tested to find out if they have COVID-19, she said.
Even if a first rapid test is negative, she recommended, people should mask up until taking a second test two or three days later.
If they continue to be worried after a second negative rapid test, they could consider getting a PCR test, she said.
Since people can have COVID-19 and be asymptomatic, people who have no symptoms could also decide to take a test two or three days after they’ve possibly been exposed, she said, particularly if they plan to be in contact with vulnerable people like the elderly.
The Boston Public Health Commission tweeted a strong recommendation that people who attended a Fourth of July gathering test for COVID-19.
The holiday arrived as concerns have been growing about the arrival of the new Omicron subvariants BA.4 and particularly BA.5, which are highly transmissible and appear to be better able to evade the immunity people have built up from getting sick from COVID-19 previously or getting vaccinated.
Advertisement
The new subvariants are likely to cause an increase in cases, Assoumou said.
BA.4 and BA.5 accounted for an estimated 17.8 and 41.6 percent of cases, respectively, in New England in the week ended Saturday, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard estimated last week that by mid-July the two variants will account for over 90 percent of cases in Massachusetts.
But Assoumou also emphasized that people can protect themselves.
“We’re not back in 2020.
We’re not helpless,” she said.
“We have the tools.”
She recommended people get vaccinated, get boosted, wear masks in indoor public settings, get tested, and make sure to use anti-COVID-19 medications if they’re at high risk of complications from the virus.
Matthew Fox, a professor of epidemiology and global health at the Boston University School of Public Health., said an increase in cases could be ahead.
“With BA.5 being so transmissible and evading prior immunity and with so much travel and reduced vigilance, I do think there is a possibility we see an infection bump spurred by this holiday weekend,” he said.
“The good news is that many events were/are outside so hopefully that mitigates a bigger impact, but I do think people should be monitoring for symptoms, testing if they have any concerns, and taking more precautions,” he said.
Andrew Lover, an assistant professor of epidemiology in the School of Public Health and Health Sciences at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, said it’s “quite possible we’ll see a spike this coming week and next from the Fourth.
BA.5 is rising fast in many places.”
Advertisement
“There’s some suggestion from Italy and Germany that it may cause fairly severe symptoms, and hospitalizations are rising in several European countries,” Lover said in an e-mail.
“However, we don’t have a good handle on any differences in symptoms yet.”
“Testing whenever possible should be a high priority for anyone with symptoms,” he said.
Martin Finucane can be reached at martin.finucane@globe.com.
Around 55 million people have dementia, with over 60 percent living in low- and middle-income countries, according to the latest figures released by the World Health Organization.
Dementia may be rife but misconceptions abound.
Symptom awareness is one area where there are gaping holes in knowledge.
B12 deficiency symptoms: The sign on your foot that's a 'red flag'
Many people automatically associate dementia with memory loss but this is not always the first symptom.
If you have frontotemporal dementia, memory loss is not present until later on.
That's because frontotemporal dementia affects the front and sides of the brain: regions which govern language and behaviour.
According to Alzheimer's Research UK, "changes" in your dietary preferences can signal the uncommon type of dementia.
READ MORE:
Dementia: How you wake up in the morning is a 'common' sign - seen in 25% of mild cases
Mpox (formerly known as monkeypox) is a type of zoonotic viral disease (a virus that spreads from animals to humans).
It was first identified in 1958 in monkeys being used for research.
But monkeys aren't the only carriers of mpox—other animals, including rodents, can transmit the virus.
Humans can get mpox if an infected animal bites them or they come in contact with an infected animal's fur or bodily fluids.
They can also get it from close contact with an infected person.
The mpox virus is from the same family of viruses that causes smallpox.
Many mpox symptoms are similar to smallpox but milder.
Mpox is rarely fatal.
The most common symptoms of mpox are fever and chills, headache, lethargy, muscle and joint pain, fatigue, swollen lymph nodes, and rash.
Mustafa Kaya / Getty Images
This article will cover the most common symptoms of mpox, less common ones, complications, and when to see a healthcare provider.
Frequent Symptoms
While there are classic symptoms of mpox, it is possible to not experience all the signs.
Researchers found that in the 2022 outbreak, many cases did not follow the general symptom patterns.
This new presentation pattern includes fewer skin symptoms and the appearance of the skin symptoms before lymph node swelling, fever, or other symptoms.
Symptoms will start within three weeks of exposure.
It is possible to test positive for the mpox virus and not have any symptoms.
Fever and Chills
Fever and chills are part of an invasion period lasting from zero to five days.
A study reported in 2022 found 62% of study participants experienced fever as an initial symptom.
With fever, the body will start to feel cold as the temperature climbs, and you will experience shivers and chills.
Headache
Intense headache is another common symptom experienced during the invasion period for mpox.
It might affect around 27% of people who contract the virus.
Lethargy
Lethargy refers to a state of fatigue accompanied by a lack of physical and mental motivation.
It affects around 41% of people who contract the mpox virus.
Muscle Aches and Joint Pain
People who experience a fever with mpox might also experience muscle aches and joint pain.
Back pain and muscle pain are considered common symptoms that are part of the invasion period.
Fatigue
Fatigue is a common symptom of most viruses and illnesses, and mpox is no different.
Fatigue with a viral disease causes a significant lack of energy and exhaustion that sleep and rest cannot immediately resolve.
Fatigue is expected as the body is fighting the mpox virus but will improve as you start to feel better and other symptoms dissipate.
Respiratory Symptoms
Some people experience upper respiratory symptoms with mpox.
Respiratory symptoms might include sore throat, nasal congestion, or cough.
Swollen Lymph Nodes
Lymphadenopathy (swollen lymph nodes) is one of the most significant symptoms of mpox, affecting more than half the people who contract the virus.
Lymph node swelling in mpox can occur in the neck, armpits, and groin on one or both sides of the body.
Skin Rash
After a few days of early symptoms, a rash will develop.
This rash can vary in appearance, the number of lesions, and distribution.
It typically appears as flat, red bumps, developing over time into papules (raised bumps), vesicles (small fluid-filled blisters), and pustules (a bump containing pus) before drying up, scabbing over, and falling off.
The rash can be painful and itchy.
This photo contains content that some people may find graphic or disturbing.
See Photo Reproduced with permission from Â© DermNet New Zealand www.dermnetnz.org 2023.
Mpox sores can appear on the mouth, genitals, or anus.
Some people might experience blisters on their hands and the soles of their feet.
Symptoms in Children
Children seem to experience the same symptoms as adults.
Infants, children under age 8, children with eczema and other skin conditions, and those with immunocompromising conditions may be at increased risk for sever disease when they contract mpox.
Most children will experience fatigue, headaches, difficulty swallowing, cough, and other classic symptoms.
They can also have facial lesions near their eyes and eyelid crusting.
How Long Will Symptoms Last?
The symptoms of mpox start within three weeks after exposure to the virus.
If you develop flu-like symptoms, you will likely experience a rash within a few days.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the entire course of the illness is from two to four weeks.
Rare Symptoms
Mpox is recognizable by the type of rash it causes and the symptoms that occur before the rash appears.
But some signs of the condition considered less common might affect smaller numbers of people.
Rarer symptoms include eye and gastrointestinal symptoms.
Eye Symptoms
Some people who contract mpox will experience ophthalmological (eye-related) symptoms.
Mpox eye symptoms might include blepharitis (eyelid infection), conjunctivitis, focal conjunctival lesions (tumors of the conjunctiva, which is the mucous membrane covering the front of the eye and inside of the eyelids), corneal ulcerations (open sores on the cornea, which is the clear covering on the front of your eye), light sensitivity, keratitis (inflammation of the cornea), and vision loss.
According to a 2022 Nature report, ophthalmic manifestations are much rarer compared to other symptoms of mpox.
According to this report, eye symptoms linked to mpox include:
Conjunctivitis (pink eye) and edema (swelling): Both symptoms will affect the eyelids of 20% of people with mpox.
People with conjunctivitis had a higher frequency of other symptoms, including "nausea, chills/sweating, oral ulcers, sore throat, general malaise, lymphadenopathy
[lymph node disease], and photophobia
[eye pain in bright light]."
This study also found that 47% of people with conjunctivitis from mpox reported being bedridden, compared to 16% who did not have conjunctivitis.
This study also found that 47% of people with conjunctivitis from mpox reported being bedridden, compared to 16% who did not have conjunctivitis.
Corneal involvement that ranged from mild to severe
Corneal infections that lead to keratitis
Corneal scarring
Permanent vision loss: One study found that unilateral or bilateral blindness and weak vision occurred in 10% of primary mpox cases (infection from an animal source) and 5% of secondary cases (person-to-person transmission).
Blepharitis in 30% of unvaccinated cases
Gastrointestinal Symptoms
Gastrointestinal symptoms like nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are not classic symptoms of mpox.
But gastrointestinal symptoms can occur in some people with viral illnesses.
People who experience these symptoms might also have severe dehydration, which could, along with other severe symptoms of mpox, lead to electrolyte abnormalities (variation in the level of charged minerals in the blood, such as sodium and potassium) and shock (diminished blood flow to the organs and tissues).
Complications/Subgroup Indications
Mpox can lead to severe complications, some of which might require hospitalization or more extensive treatment methods.
Those at greater risk for severe disease include young children (under 8 years), individuals who are pregnant or immunocompromised, and individuals with history of atopic dermatitis or eczema.
Complications of mpox can include:
Secondary skin infections
Severe scarring on the face, arms, and legs
Pneumonia (lung inflammation)
Vision changes or blindness
Proctitis (inflammation and sores inside the rectum) and urinary problems
Death (rare)
An observational study reported in August 2022 in the journal Clinical Microbiology and Infection found that 36% of study participants had mpox complications.
The most commonly observed complications were anal region pain and cellulitis (a skin infection).
Complications that required hospitalization included cellulitis, paronychia (nail infection), severe digestive and anal involvement, noncardiac angina (chest pain in people without heart disease), dysphagia (swallowing difficulty), blepharitis, and keratitis.
When to See a Healthcare Provider
People who have been in close contact with a person or animal with mpox should monitor their health for at least three weeks after exposure.
You should check your body temperature daily.
If you develop a fever (100.4 or above), swollen lymph nodes, rash, or other mpox symptoms, self-isolate and contact a healthcare provider immediately.
Mpox is rare in the United States.
It is transmitted by close contact.
If you develop a new rash, have symptoms of mpox, and think you have been exposed to the virus, you should reach out to a healthcare provider.
Summary
Mpox is a zoonotic viral disease, meaning it is transmitted from animals to humans.
It also can be transmitted between humans.
The mpox virus is related to the virus that causes smallpox.
It can cause similar but mild symptoms.
The most common symptoms of mpox are fever, headache, lethargy, muscle and joint pain, fatigue, swollen lymph nodes, and rash.
Less common symptoms include severe eye symptoms and gastrointestinal symptoms.
Mpox can cause more serious problems considered complications, including nail and skin infections, noncardiac chest pain, problems with swelling, and inflammatory eye troubles.
If you have been in close contact with a person or animal with mpox, you should monitor yourself for at least three weeks.
If you develop symptoms, self-isolate and call a healthcare provider.
A Word From Verywell
For most people who contract mpox, the condition is mild and self-limiting.
But it can be a serious disease, especially for immunocompromised children and adults (people who have a weakened immune system).
Most people recover fully from mpox, but some might experience severe complications.
Therefore, it is crucial to seek medical help if you think you might have been exposed, especially for a child or anyone with an underlying health condition.
If you're comforted by sipping something warm, Vora recommends this method: "Turn a few cups a day into half-caf, then transition those to black tea...to green tea...to just a few sips."
Eventually, your caffeine intake will be so low, you should be able to quit altogether.
From there, consider switching to herbal tea if you still want something warm to sip on.
People are being warned of a sign on their skin which could be an indicator they have a common lung condition that affects their lungs.
Those who get 'chicken skin' could have asthma - something that 5.4 million Brits suffer from.
Medically known as keratosis pilaris, 'chicken skin' causes dry, rough patches and tiny bumps, often on the upper arms, thighs, cheeks or buttocks.
The bumps usually don't hurt, itch and are harmless, though they could be a sign of asthma.
They can also be red on white skin or brownish-black on darker skin.
According to the British Skin Foundation, up to 40 per cent of adults and 60 per cent of teens are affected by it.
While scientists do not yet know the true cause of keratosis pilaris, it is known to have a genetic factor.
It is seen more commonly in inflammatory conditions - such as asthma and allergies.
It is also associated with eczema, dry skin, vitamin A and essential fatty acid deficiency.
In terms of treated, people with keratosis pilaris can treat it with emollients, including Vaseline, by trapping in moisture to soften the flaky skin.
Exfoliants or even laser hair removal can be used to reduce its appearance as well, as reported by the Mirror.
What is keratosis pilaris?
Most people with keratosis pilaris have it for years, and it may eventually clear up by itself.
Until it does, there are things you can do to help improve the appearance of your skin.
According to the NHS, you can:
moisturise your skin – ask a pharmacist what's most suitable for you
use mild and unperfumed soaps and bathing products
gently scrub your skin with a washcloth or exfoliating mitt
have cool or lukewarm showers and baths
pat your skin dry instead of rubbing it after washing
Speak to a pharmacist if:
things you try yourself are not helping your keratosis pilaris and the condition is bothering you
your skin becomes itchy or inflamed
you're not sure if you need to see a GP
They can recommend creams or lotion to help your skin.
They can also tell you whether you need to see a GP.
Keratosis pilaris happens when your hair follicles become blocked with a build-up of keratin, a substance found in skin, hair and nails.
Nobody knows exactly why keratin builds up, but the condition is thought to run in families.
So if your parents have it, you may get it, too.
Keratosis pilaris is not infectious, so you cannot spread or catch it.
What is asthma?
Asthma is a common lung condition that causes occasional breathing difficulties.
It affects people of all ages and often starts in childhood, although it can also develop for the first time in adults.
There's currently no cure, but there are simple treatments that can help keep the symptoms under control so it does not have a big impact on your life.
Asthma is a long-term condition for many people, particularly if it first develops when you're an adult.
In children, it sometimes goes away or improves during the teenage years, but can come back later in life.
The main symptoms of asthma are:
a whistling sound when breathing (wheezing)
breathlessness
a tight chest, which may feel like a band is tightening around it
coughing
The symptoms can sometimes get temporarily worse.
This is known as an asthma attack.
See a GP if you think you or your child may have asthma.
Several conditions can cause similar symptoms, so it's important to get a proper diagnosis and correct treatment.
The GP will usually be able to diagnose asthma by asking about symptoms and carrying out some simple tests.
Asthma is usually treated by using an inhaler, a small device that lets you breathe in medicines.
The main types are:
reliever inhalers – used when needed to quickly relieve asthma symptoms for a short time
preventer inhalers – used every day to prevent asthma symptoms happening
Some people also need to take tablets.
Free-floating anxiety is a general sense of uneasiness that is not tied to any particular object or specific situation.
The term is often used to describe feelings of discomfort, nervousness, worry, and anxiety that appear for seemingly no reason.
It often occurs with generalized anxiety disorder, but it may also be present with other types of anxiety conditions.
It is important to note that free-floating anxiety is not a distinct mental disorder recognized in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5).
Instead, it is a term used to describe the non-specific feelings of anxiety that people sometimes experience from time to time as well as with conditions such as generalized anxiety disorder.
Symptoms
Free-floating anxiety is characterized by feelings of:
Anxiety
Concern
Discomfort
Dread
Fear
Jitters
Misgiving
Nervousness
Panic
Unease
Restlessness
Stress
Worry
It is important to note that these feelings may come and go and do not have an easily apparent source.
This type of anxiety is most commonly associated with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).
GAD is characterized by persistent and excessive anxiety about a wide variety of things.
Other common symptoms of GAD include:
Difficulty concentrating
Fatigue
Excessive, frequent worries about everyday things
Irritability
Muscle tension
Restlessness
Sleep disruptions
Press Play for Advice on Coping With Anxiety Hosted by therapist Amy Morin, LCSW, this episode of The Verywell Mind Podcast shares how to recognize and ease anxiety, featuring neuroscientist Dr. Jud Brewer.
Click below to listen now.
Follow Now: Apple Podcasts / Spotify / Google Podcasts
Diagnosis
If you are experiencing free-floating anxiety, your doctor may start by conducting a physical exam and performing lab tests to help rule out any medical conditions that might be contributing to your symptoms.
Diabetes, hyperthyroidism, asthma, chronic pain, and substance use disorders are just a few examples of conditions that may play a role in causing anxiety.
Next, your doctor will ask questions about the symptoms you are experiencing, including the nature of the symptoms as well as their frequency, duration, and severity.
Based on your medical history and symptoms, your doctor may then diagnose you with an anxiety disorder such as generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, or a specific phobia.
Causes of Free-Floating Anxiety
The exact causes of the free-floating anxiety that occurs in generalized anxiety disorder are not known.
However, a number of different factors are thought to contribute to this condition including:
Brain chemistry : People who experience anxiety may have differences in their brain structure or systems that contribute to the experience of free-floating anxiety.
Neurotransmitter systems related to serotonin as well as a structure called the amygdala are both thought to contribute to feelings of anxiety.
﻿ ﻿
: People who experience anxiety may have differences in their brain structure or systems that contribute to the experience of free-floating anxiety.
Neurotransmitter systems related to serotonin as well as a structure called the amygdala are both thought to contribute to feelings of anxiety.
﻿ Genetics : People who have generalized anxiety disorder are more likely to have close family members with anxiety or other mental disorders.
﻿ ﻿
: People who have generalized anxiety disorder are more likely to have close family members with anxiety or other mental disorders.
﻿ Experiences : Negative or traumatic experiences can also play a role in making people feel anxious, fearful, and worried.
:
Negative or traumatic experiences can also play a role in making people feel anxious, fearful, and worried.
Upbringing: Children raised with parents or caregivers who modeled anxious responses may also be more likely to experience elevated levels of anxiety later during adulthood.
Approximately 2.7% of adults in the U.S. experienced generalized anxiety disorder in the past year.
The condition also tends to be twice as common in women as it is in men.
Impact of Free-Floating Anxiety
Free-floating anxiety can have a number of different effects on a person’s life.
All of that worrying can raise a person’s stress levels, which can have a serious impact on overall health.
It may make it more difficult to get a restful night's sleep, which can leave people with feelings of daytime tiredness and fatigue.
Because people with free-floating anxiety spend so much time preoccupied with these general feelings of unease and worry, they have a more difficult time enjoying their lives and experience lower levels of overall life satisfaction and happiness.
Feelings of anxiety can also contribute to other problems including depression, headaches, social withdrawal, substance misuse, relationship problems, and even thoughts of suicide.
Treatment
Fortunately, there are treatments for anxiety that can be very effective.
If your symptoms are interfering with your ability to function normally and are causing significant distress, talk to your doctor.
Some of the treatments that your doctor may recommend are listed below.
Psychotherapy
One approach known as cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is one of the most effective treatments for generalized anxiety disorder.
CBT focuses on helping people identify the automatic negative thought patterns that contribute to feelings of anxiety.
Once they learn to recognize these thoughts, people can then work to replace those patterns with more helpful ones.
The Best Online Therapy Programs We've tried, tested and written unbiased reviews of the best online therapy programs including Talkspace, Betterhelp, and Regain.
Medications
Your doctor may also prescribe medications to help you manage your feelings of anxiety.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) , a type of antidepressant, are sometimes prescribed to relieve anxiety.
, a type of antidepressant, are sometimes prescribed to relieve anxiety.
An anti-anxiety medication called BuSpar (buspirone) may also be prescribed.
may also be prescribed.
Benzodiazepines may sometimes be used on a short-term basis to relieve feelings of acute anxiety.
Coping With Free-Floating Anxiety
While free-floating anxiety can be a sign of a mental health condition such as generalized anxiety disorder, it can also be something that people experience from time to time without having an actual anxiety disorder.
Whether your anxiety is more persistent or if it comes and goes, there are things that you can do to better cope with these feelings.
Some things you can do include:
Avoid unhealthy coping mechanisms : Turning to alcohol or other substances may help in the short-term, but will often create worse problems in the long-term.
:
Turning to alcohol or other substances may help in the short-term, but will often create worse problems in the long-term.
Eat a healthy diet : Some research suggests that nutrition may play a role in anxiety, so eating a healthy diet may help you feel better.
: Some research suggests that nutrition may play a role in anxiety, so eating a healthy diet may help you feel better.
Exercise : Studies have shown that staying physically active can be important for reducing symptoms of anxiety.
Research suggests that exercise can be an effective way to release tension and reduce feelings of worry and anxiety.
: Studies have shown that staying physically active can be important for reducing symptoms of anxiety.
Research suggests that exercise can be an effective way to release tension and reduce feelings of worry and anxiety.
Practice relaxation techniques : Findings ways to lower your anxiety levels can make it easier to cope with worry and stress.
Strategies such as meditation, mindfulness, deep breathing, and visualization may help take your mind off your worries and lower your overall stress levels.
: Findings ways to lower your anxiety levels can make it easier to cope with worry and stress.
Strategies such as meditation, mindfulness, deep breathing, and visualization may help take your mind off your worries and lower your overall stress levels.
Stop smoking and limit caffeine: Caffeine and nicotine can exacerbate feelings of anxiety, so limiting these substances may be helpful.
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) treatments, such as St. John's wort, are sometimes used to treat anxiety.
Some of these supplements may have serious risks, so you should always talk to your healthcare provider before you try any supplement or alternative treatment.
For example, St. John’s wort has the potential to cause serotonin syndrome when combined with some antidepressants.
A Word From Verywell
Free-floating anxiety can be distressing and may be a sign of an anxiety disorder.
If you are having feelings of unease and worry that don’t seem to have a specific cause, talk to your doctor or a mental health professional.
Anxiety often grows worse over time and may eventually lead to avoidance behaviors that can interfere with your life and ability to function.
Effective treatments are available, including online therapy options that may allow you to learn how to manage your anxiety using convenient apps, websites, and other online tools.
If you're raising a baby during the fall and winter months, you probably do everything you can to keep your little one healthy.
That's partly because colder weather coincides with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) season.
RSV is a virus that mimics a bad cold in toddlers and children, but unlike a cold, it attacks the tiny airways of the lower respiratory system.
In newborns and babies, "the degree of inflammation and mucus production can be substantial," This inflammation and mucus can cause blockage of the smaller airways in the lungs, making it difficult for young infants to breathe," says Alyssa Silver, M.D., an attending physician at Children's Hospital at Montefiore in New York.
Five Serious Signs of RSV in Babies
RSV is much more dangerous in newborns than in older children due to their still-developing airways.
In fact, more than 40% of hospitalizations from RSV occur in children under 6 months old, says Jennifer Marshall DNP, FNP-BC, a nurse practitioner at Avista Family Medicine in Erie, Colorado.
Even more frightening, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that RSV leads to 58,000 hospitalizations and 100-500 deaths in children under the age of 5 each year.
So how do you know if your little one is infected with RSV?
The first step is contacting your doctor for common symptoms like runny nose, cough, fever, and sneezing; they'll be able to diagnose.
In the meantime, watch out for these five serious signs of RSV in newborns, which means that the illness might progress.
They warrant a trip to a healthcare provider right away.
Retractions and breathing difficulties
Retraction breathing is when a person is not getting enough air, and the area between their ribs and neck appears to sink inward while the person tries to inhale.
Never ignore any signs of breathing difficulty in an infant.
This includes very fast breathing, using extra muscles to breathe, pulling at the neck, nostrils flaring in and out, or seeing in between the ribs while breathing—called retractions, says Dr. Silver.
These are all signs your baby is struggling to get enough oxygen intake, which is an emergency.
Fewer wet diapers than usual
Any infant who goes more than six or eight hours without a wet diaper should see a physician to ward off dehydration, says Dr. Silver.
Unlike other common childhood illnesses, dehydration from RSV isn't caused by high fever or vomiting.
Instead, it's a side effect of feeding difficulties caused by the extreme nasal congestion common in RSV sufferers.
Other signs of dehydration in babies include:
No tears when your baby cries
Dry mouth
The fontanelle (soft spot in your baby's head), appears sunken
Irritability
Blue tinge around lips and fingernails
According to Dr. Silver, any bluish discoloration of the skin is worrisome.
"These are signs that your baby may need oxygen or additional support with breathing and should be seen in the emergency room right away," she warns.
Insufficient oxygen can lead to a condition called central cyanosis, when the body, including lips, mucus membranes, and fingernails, can appear bluish.
To treat this, doctors will likely give your child oxygen and, in some cases, may prescribe antibiotics.
Apnea
Apnea, or a period of time where your baby is not breathing, is critical in an infant under 6 months, says Marshall.
Although this is one of the more common—yet terrifying—RSV symptoms in newborns (very young newborns may have pauses in their breathing for more than 20 seconds when they have RSV, according to Dr. Silver), it still should be evaluated promptly.
Apnea is considered a series complication of RSV.
According to the American Academy of Pediatrics, 20% of babies younger than 6 months with RSV who require hospitalization will experience apnea.
The good news is that apnea appears to be a limited occurrence in premature babies younger than one month and does not tend to reappear in later infections.
Poor feeding
If newborns have RSV, they can become so severely congested that they cannot complete a feeding.
"This can progress to the point that babies need either supplementation in their feeding with a nasogastric tube (from their nose to their stomach) or intravenous (IV) fluids," says Dr. Silver.
Monitor their diaper output if you're struggling to feed your baby for more than a few minutes.
A lack of wet diapers means they may not receive adequate nutrition, and a visit to the pediatrician is definitely warranted.
My Baby Has RSV—Now What?
What should you do if your infant catches RSV despite your best efforts?
"Unfortunately, there is no magic medicine that makes RSV get better faster.
The large majority of those with RSV need time and support through this illness," says Dr. Silver.
You can alleviate symptoms with some comfort measures; for example, use a nasal aspirator to ease congestion, encourage hydration, and give over-the-counter medication if a doctor recommends it.
Remember, when in doubt, call your doctor.
IBS Awareness Month:
Tips For Relieving Symptoms Of Irritable Bowel Syndrome
A kind of imbalance in the microbiome’s composition known as Dysbiosis occurs when harmful bacteria accumulate and the depletion of valuable bacteria.
This situation can lead to several health issues, from irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) to severe conditions like cancer.
If you have irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), you are not alone; the prevalence of IBS is believed to be 5 per cent to 10 per cent globally.
The month of April is designated as IBS Awareness Month to increase public awareness about this condition and support those struggling with it.
Do you know IBS affects up to 10 per cent of the world's population?
Yes, that's true.
If you have irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), you are one of the millions of people living with this condition.
Despite the high prevalence of IBS, many patients go untreated and are unaware that their symptoms point to a medically recognized condition.
Irritable Bowel Syndrome is a medical illness with a wide range of symptoms, several trigger factors, and treatment choices ranging from lifestyle modifications to pharmaceuticals.
In an exclusive interaction with TheHealthSite, Dr Deepak Kumar Gupta, HOD Gastroenterology, Consultant Gastroenterologist Hepatologist and Therapeutic, Medicover Hospitals, Navi Mumbai, tells us all about irritable bowel syndrome, including causes, symptoms, treatment and prevention.
Understand Irritable Bowel Syndrome
IBS is a medical ailment that causes intestinal pain.
IBS, not to be confused with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), also involves digestive symptoms along with pain that may occur concurrently.
It frequently stays untreated for years and only becomes a problem when the symptoms are no longer manageable.
TRENDING NOW
IBS has been linked to intestinal damage in certain situations.
Some people have severe symptoms, while others have moderate ones.
According to data, over 7.5 per cent of Indians suffer from IBS.
However, just 30 per cent of these people get therapy for irritable bowel syndrome.
Know how irritable bowel syndrome is diagnosed
If you've been suffering from IBS symptoms, you should seek the advice of a gastroenterologist near you.
Doctors can establish whether your symptoms are due to irritable bowel syndrome or something else.
They will ask you a few questions before your physical exam to learn about your symptoms and review your medical history.
In some cases, we may request a blood test or a stool sample to rule out conditions that might be misdiagnosed as irritable bowel syndrome.
You may like to read
Common IBS symptoms include:
Abdominal pain
The urgency of the bowel/ feeling of incomplete evacuation
Bloating\flatulence
Constipation
Stools that are too loose
Discomfort in the stomach
Appetite loss
If we discover that you have IBS, our GI experts will be able to select the best irritable bowel syndrome treatment for you.
Why is the cause of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)?
Despite the specific aetiology of IBS having yet to be determined, a few ideas have emerged.
A few studies imply that irritable bowel syndrome is induced by the colon's responsiveness to a stimulus such as a food item (milk products, wheat, milk, nuts).
According to research, an individual may get IBS if their gut muscles are weak or do not work at the needed capacity.
Additional research suggests that stress, the release of hormones like serotonin and gastrin, or particular types of bacteria might cause IBS.
Irritable bowel syndrome prevention techniques you ought to know
The following are some general tips for relieving irritable bowel syndrome symptoms.
Just eat homemade dishes created using fresh ingredients.
Avoid meals that are greasy, hot, or processed.
Keep track of your dietary supplements and attempt to avoid things that can trigger IBS by correlating the symptoms you may have with the food you eat.
Try not to miss or postpone any meals.
Adopt healthy lifestyle changes and incorporate lots of meditation or other relaxation and fitness exercises in your daily routine
Eating at least three servings (80g) of fresh fruit each day.
Limit intake of coffee and tea to a maximum of three cups of tea per day.
Do not try to eat too soon.
Avoid alcoholic beverages and fizzy drinks.
Irritable bowel syndrome treatment focuses on symptom relief so that you can live as normally as possible.
Some people can manage their symptoms by controlling their food, lifestyle, and stress.
Medication and psychotherapy might be used to address more severe symptoms.
Contact your doctor to learn more about controlling IBS and having a healthy lifestyle.
This year, the International Foundation for Functional Gastrointestinal Disorder (IFFGD) is celebrating IBS Awareness Month with the theme "During this time, we join patients, family members, and caregivers to increase public awareness about IBS and help destigmatize the different types of IBS."
Summary
Our findings indicate that comorbid individuals often present with anaemia, rather than with localising symptoms, and they are less likely promptly investigated with colonoscopy/sigmoidoscopy.
Among patients presenting to primary care with CRC-relevant symptoms, diagnostic intervals before a cancer diagnosis are on average more than twice as long for patients with one or more hospital-recorded comorbidity compared to non-comorbid individuals.
The risk of emergency cancer diagnosis increases with increasing comorbidity burden and is particularly high for individuals with CVD compared to those without.
Interpretation and comparison with the literature
The study highlighted that comorbid versus non-comorbid patients had more frequently records of anaemia, which was associated with a lower likelihood of prompt colonoscopy/sigmoidoscopy and a higher risk of emergency presentation.
Previous research indicated that anaemia can be associated with missed opportunities for earlier cancer diagnosis [42, 43].
Our study suggests that this might particularly apply to comorbid patients and it may partially explain their higher risk of emergency cancer diagnosis.
Atypical symptoms are known to be associated with longer diagnostic intervals [44, 45] and an increased risk of emergency diagnosis [42, 46, 47], but evidence is scant on variations in symptomatic presentations by comorbidity status and how this might influence the timely diagnosis of cancer
[11].
A previous study indicated that colon cancer patients with ‘serious’ comorbidities often repeatedly presented to their doctor with cancer-related symptoms before an emergency cancer diagnosis
[22].
Research based either on primary care
[13, 48] or secondary care data [12, 49] reported longer time to cancer diagnosis for comorbid patients [11], but to our knowledge no population-based study has examined variations in the use and timing of endoscopy by patients’ comorbidity status and symptoms.
Our findings indicate not only that symptomatic presentations of CRC might differ by comorbidity status; comorbidities are also strongly associated with a lower likelihood of prompt colonoscopy/sigmoidoscopy and a higher risk of emergency cancer diagnosis, independently of symptoms and socio-demographic characteristics.
This suggests that more than one mechanism might be at play in increasing emergency presentations.
Hospital-recorded comorbidities are often complex to manage.
Thus, despite being associated with frequent healthcare encounters, instead of providing opportunities for earlier cancer diagnosis, they can interfere with prompt investigations of an as-yet undiagnosed cancer [22] through the ‘competing demands’ mechanism, particularly if symptoms are vague.
For instance, severe CVD might need to be appropriately managed in some patients before performing invasive investigations, such as colonoscopy, which might prolong the time before cancer diagnosis.
This is in line with our finding of a lower likelihood of prompt colonoscopy/sigmoidoscopy in patients with CVD, similar to an American study on missed opportunities for endoscopy in CVD patients [43].
It should be noted that shorter diagnostic intervals might sometimes reflect rapidly progressing aggressive cancers [50, 51].
However, our findings suggest possible opportunities for earlier diagnosis at least in some patients with comorbidities and cancer-related symptoms, who experienced prolonged time before investigations.
Strengths and limitations
Strengths of the study include the use of real world population-based data, encompassing symptomatic presentations in primary care, hospital-recorded comorbidities, investigations performed in hospital and ‘routes to diagnosis’ information.
The study demonstrates the usefulness of integrating clinical data spanning across the entire diagnostic pathway.
The methodology, which has highlighted key factors to be considered for enhancing risk-stratification and improve diagnostic timeliness, can be usefully applied to other cancers and patient populations.
It might be particularly relevant for lung or upper GI cancers, which are often diagnosed late and frequently present in patients with comorbidities [11].
The use of validated algorithms for defining hospital-recorded comorbidities allowed us to provide novel evidence on the likely role played by severe morbidities in influencing the use and timeliness of colonoscopy.
Using different morbidity markers and measures (Charlson score, morbidity count, presence of specific morbidities) consistently indicated strong associations between morbidity burden, longer diagnostic intervals and emergency cancer diagnosis.
Some associations might have appeared significant by chance due to testing for multiple variables.
However, the strong evidence (p-values < 0.001) for variation by comorbidity burden in diagnostic intervals and emergency diagnosis, suggests that such associations are unlikely due to chance.
The study limitations include the likely underestimation of less severe morbidities typically managed in primary care, for example, well-controlled diabetes or benign gastro-intestinal conditions [16, 52, 53].
Mental health issues have also not been examined here, while they might play an important role in influencing the timely diagnosis of cancer [44, 54].
Our study did not support the hypothesis whereby morbidities requiring regular healthcare contacts (e.g. diabetes) might provide opportunities for earlier cancer diagnosis; nor did it support the ‘alternative explanation’ mechanism whereby morbidities with similar signs/symptoms to CRC can lead to diagnostic delays [11, 13, 17, 44].
We cannot exclude that such effects might apply to comorbidities managed in primary care
[44].
Previous research indicated that well-controlled diabetes or hypertension monitoring might sometimes offer opportunities for earlier cancer diagnosis [11, 22].
Examining the role of less sever conditions managed in primary care deserves to be examined in detail in future studies.
However, focusing on morbidities severe enough to be recorded during a hospital admission in the 6 years pre-diagnosis has face validity regarding the current study question, as these morbidities may influence clinicians’ decision-making about the use of invasive diagnostic procedures, such as colonoscopy, that may require pre-operative assessment.
Additionally, studies based on patient interviews are needed to evaluate patient-related factors, such as self-management of symptoms or comorbidities, anxiety and/or willingness to undergo invasive investigations, as these factors might also influence the use of investigations and diagnostic timeliness.
Moreover, while we accounted for clustering of patients by GP practice, details on area-specific availability of diagnostic services and waiting times could provide further insights into possible reasons for longer diagnostic intervals.
CVD and other conditions found here to be associated with prolonged diagnostic intervals and emergency presentations are aetiologically unrelated to CRC and they probably developed over many years, suggesting that reverse causation unlikely explains our findings.
We did not have information on the specific event triggering the emergency admission (bowel perforation, occlusion or a CVD-related emergency).
However, irrespective of the triggering event, reducing emergency cancer diagnosis is a key public health target [1, 3], as it is strongly associated with advanced cancer stage and poor survival
[7, 55].
We focused on the use of lower GI endoscopies, which are well documented in HES.
Having used routinely collected clinical codes, ascertainment bias cannot be excluded.
However, previous validation studies have shown 96% accuracy for routine data collected in HES
[32, 33].
Imaging tests (including ultrasound scans, CT/MRI) are only partially captured in HES, and imaging data from HES-DID might allow to explore this further [12].
Linked data were available only up to 2015 and more recent data is needed, considering persisting inequalities in emergency presentations and poorer survival in comorbid patients [56, 57].
Our study does not exactly map on the primary and secondary care intervals, as defined in other research [12, 44, 45, 50], since we relied on the date of test performance, but lacked information on the GP referral date.
While the symptom-to-test interval in our study is longer than the referral interval reported in a national audit [14], it reflects the time symptomatic patients wait before being investigated.
We lacked information on hereditary non-polyposis CRC or familial adenomatous polyposis, but they likely represent a small minority of cases (<2%) in our study population of mostly older individuals.
Implications for practice and research
Lower GI endoscopy is the gold standard for investigating patients with symptoms suggestive of CRC.
Non-invasive strategies, such as FIT or other promising tools for supporting the diagnostic process in primary care
[4,5,6, 58], combined with appropriate safety-netting (including pre-booked short-term follow-up visits), can be used for selecting patients at increased risk and referring them for urgent investigations
[59].
FIT might be particularly useful for patients with serious comorbidities to prioritise those requiring immediate endoscopy and reduce emergency presentations, but risks and benefits will need to be evaluated.
Older age (75 years and over) was also significantly associated with longer diagnostic intervals for colon cancer possibly due to the need of performing pre-colonoscopy assessments/preparations to minimize the risks associated with invasive investigations especially in older and frail patients.
Research is needed on appropriate testing strategies for comorbid and older individuals and on the role played by frailty and the risks of invasive testing in influencing clinician’s decision-making and patient’s attitudes to testing.
Using FIT and minimally invasive radiology tests might be particularly useful as first-line assessment in older and comorbid patients and reduce their higher risk of emergency presentations.
Timely access to cancer diagnostic services is essential, especially for symptomatic individuals with multimorbidity, who can be particularly vulnerable.
This has been emphasised by the recent Covid-19 crisis, during which many cancer investigations have been postponed with possible dramatic consequences especially for multimorbid cancer patients [18,19,20, 60].
As patients with multiple conditions might not spontaneously report all symptoms, especially if vague [61], targeted patient education campaigns might be useful for individuals with chronic conditions, as well as more systematic adoption of symptom elicitation and holistic approaches during doctor-patient encounters [62, 63].
Closer interaction and easier access to specialist advice for GPs and use of multi-disciplinary rapid diagnostic centres might be particularly important for comorbid patients [4, 64, 65].
Little is known on how comorbidities might influence CRC screening participation, but some studies suggested a lower screening probability for comorbid individuals [11, 29].
Encouraging age-based screening could be particularly valuable to reduce the risk of emergency and advanced stage cancer diagnosis in individuals with morbidities associated with a higher CRC risk, such as diabetes [11].
While the wider use of screening may allow diagnosing CRC earlier and substantially reduce emergency presentations in the future, currently only 10% of all CRC in England are diagnosed through screening [24].
This highlights the key importance of improving the diagnosis in symptomatic patients.’
Our findings suggest the potential usefulness of morbidity status as a risk-stratifier when assessing the risk of diagnostic delays in symptomatic patients with as-yet undiagnosed cancer.
For example, the positive predictive values associated with anaemia or rectal bleeding may vary by morbidity status, given the observed variations in symptomatic presentations.
The present research focused on CRC patients, but the methods and findings can inform further work on other cancer sites, for example, lung or upper GI cancers, which are often diagnosed late and frequently present in patients with comorbidities [11, 53].
Moreover, given the greater risk among comorbid patients of cancer being diagnosed as an emergency and at advanced stage, our findings suggest that a lower threshold for investigations might be beneficial, but future studies are warranted aimed at evaluating risks and benefits of different thresholds.
Research is also warranted aimed at developing enhanced risk-stratification tools to prioritise patients needing urgent tests, accounting for comorbidity, symptoms and demographic characteristics.
State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia
Washington Washington D.C.
West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Puerto Rico US Virgin Islands Armed Forces Americas Armed Forces Pacific Armed Forces Europe Northern Mariana Islands Marshall Islands American Samoa Federated States of Micronesia Guam Palau Alberta, Canada British Columbia, Canada Manitoba, Canada New Brunswick, Canada Newfoundland, Canada Nova Scotia, Canada Northwest Territories, Canada Nunavut, Canada Ontario, Canada Prince Edward Island, Canada Quebec, Canada Saskatchewan, Canada Yukon Territory, Canada
Zip Code
Roberta Cigna
WITHIN 24 hours of asking an online covid-19 support group if anyone had been experiencing prolonged or unusual symptoms, I had been messaged by 140 people.
The list was mind-boggling and deeply upsetting.
“I feel like I’m in the middle of a waking nightmare,” said Zoe Wall, who was previously fit and healthy.
Two months after developing covid-19-like symptoms, she was still experiencing chest pains and “fatigue beyond description”.
Harry’s symptoms started with a terrible headache and itchy body, followed by shortness of breath.
He was still experiencing breathing difficulties, chest pain, numbness in his arm and bloating 10 weeks later.
Jenn had had no sense of smell or taste since testing positive for covid-19 on 31 March.
Abbi had minimal respiratory symptoms, but very bad gastric ones and lost 19 kilograms in two months.
Others reported fatigue, headaches, tingling fingertips and brain fog.
As the months tick by since the start of the coronavirus pandemic
and we learn more about covid-19, it is becoming increasingly evident that even mild cases can have distressing and long-lasting effects.
“There’s clearly something going on here.
It is not their imagination or hypochondria.
It doesn’t even seem to be linked to how severely they had the disease, as far as I can see,” says Danny Altmann, an immunologist at Imperial College London.
All this means we need to rethink how we diagnose and treat covid-19.
The long list of symptoms also seems to suggest there might even be several subtypes of the disease, which could help us predict which cases will become serious.
When the pandemic was announced in early March, the prevailing…
One of the first steps to take when a person experiences COVID like symptoms or gets diagnosed with the infection is to track down the symptoms, and the number of days they have been experiencing the symptoms.
It is assumed that most people start to develop symptoms 2-3 days after the virus incubates inside the body.
Initially, the first part of the infection is a viral reaction, and hence, feels like a viral fever for most people.
Only in the second phase does the immune system kick into action.
While the immune system produces voracious antibodies to root out the infection, sometimes, it can get overstimulated and cause its worsening, which can start from day 6 or 7.
That's the time when the actual COVID battle begins for many people.
Days 5-10 may be the time when most people suffer from a 'second wave' of symptoms, which can be more severe.
It is also the time researches say that the infection follows a consistent pattern as well.
In fact, what doctors are now observing is that more and more people are thronging hospitals with severe symptoms, pneumonia-like complications after taking the second week of infection casually.
Katrina Delargy, Managing Director of TIYGA Health, tells us what we need to know about real-time symptom tracking for long COVID
“Speed trumps perfection.
Perfection is the enemy of good when it comes to emergency responses” – the words of Dr Michael J. Ryan, WHO Executive Director, resonated around the world in March 2020.
(1) He was referring to the spread of coronavirus, but this could apply to long COVID.
WHO’s Director-General, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, warned, “Long Covid has an impact on the individual, on society and on the economy,” highlighting the importance of the “three Rs” – recognition, research, and rehabilitation.
(2)
Evidence suggests a “hidden iceberg” of undiagnosed COVID-19 people who are now suffering from long COVID.
If 10-20% of all COVID-19 infections lead to long COVID, we could have 10-20 million long-term cases to manage.
Finding a good approach to long COVID needs to be informed by real-time symptom data.
Year of the timeline
In 2020-21, daily freedoms have been dictated by the trends in COVID statistics.
The numbers were often shocking and disturbing, but the really crucial issue was (and still is) the direction the numbers were going and the speed of change.
Timelines became important.
Symptom reporting in real-time
2020-21 saw many forms of routine healthcare interaction being abandoned or become virtual and, in the minds of the public, there was increased vigilance for personal risk exposure.
Never before have so many people been so vigilant for the appearance of new symptoms that might normally be dismissed.
The list of symptoms that were associated with COVID-19 grew, helped by the daily reporting by over 4 million citizens who continue to use the King’s College Zoe COVID Study app for research.
By making it easy, convenient and relevant researchers could obtain real-time data on symptom prevalence – and how long the symptoms lasted.
This self-report data contributed to the overall national picture of the spread of infection.
Long COVID, post-COVID syndrome or post-viral fatigue?
Symptom reporting and analysis became central to the debates.
For a long time, a key question was about how many asymptomatic carriers there were in the community or moving around.
Increasingly the question of how long the symptoms of COVID-19 last.
‘Long COVID’ is commonly used to describe signs and symptoms that continue or develop after acute COVID-19.
The symptoms of long COVID (Post-Acute Sequelae of COVID-19 or PASC) are multisystemic/ multiorgan and now known to involve cell damage.
NICE distinguishes between the acute phase (up to four weeks), the ongoing symptomatic phase (four to 12 weeks) and post-COVID-19 syndrome where signs and symptoms that develop during or after an infection consistent with COVID-19, continue for more than 12 weeks and are not explained by an alternative diagnosis.
Long COVID is not in the textbooks yet, the gold-standard clinical trials may have started and answers will hopefully evolve with trial results.
In April 2021, Dr John Brooks (CDC) noted: “If you’re having symptoms you haven’t had before, something new following COVID [such as] chest pain, difficulty breathing, you can’t get your thinking clearly, you’re just not getting better the way you thought you should, have a low threshold to seek care.”
Long COVID is affecting previously young and healthy people, it can affect all professions including healthcare workers.
The effects of long COVID can be debilitating and have the power to end people’s careers.
(3)
TIYGA:
Voice of the patient
Much of the research on long COVID is now patient-led or patient-driven, it has to happen in real-time and relies on capturing data on what symptoms a person has, how those symptoms vary in intensity day by day and how long they last.
National support groups are being formed to investigate clinically unknown parameters.
TIYGA’s platform can accommodate both the wide range of symptoms and the requirement for ease of use by people suffering from fatigue and brain fog.
Long COVID relies on self-report of symptom data, TIYGA Health is engaging with local support groups to capture data.
Analysis of such data can contribute to the determination of optimal pathways to the right specialists and investigations.
Early intervention
There are lessons to be learned from chronic pain and other complex conditions where the time delays between the patient seeing the GP, the GP making a referral and the pain management specialist giving a diagnosis can be several years – during which time the problem has become more difficult to solve.
Part of this delay may be due to inconsistent history from the patient, vague signs or symptoms or scepticism from the healthcare provider.
Precision medicine should be preventative, predictive, personalised and participatory.
Long COVID affects people differently.
Maybe we need a precision medicine approach, accelerating healthcare 4.0.
Right person, right treatment, right time, right place
Certain therapies can be highly beneficial for some patients but can risk harm for patients with post-viral syndromes.
Real-time symptom data can help us to understand which patients need to be fast-tracked to specialist teams.
Activated digitally savvy patients are ready to embrace such approaches, as seen in Figure 1.
We need a dynamic and responsive approach that allows prediction of exacerbation which can support anticipatory personalised care.
New hybrid models of care need to combine remote and place-based care and prioritise those at greatest risk.
We cannot wait for a perfect model to be validated by researchers before adopting it in practice.
Real-time symptom and activity tracking with smart analytics are vital to address the long COVID challenge.
References
1 https://twitter.com/ungeneva/status/1238740397901447168?lang=en
2 https://www.independent.ie/irish-news/one-in-ten-people-will-keep-suffering-symptoms-months-after-coronavirus-infection-40169764.html
3 https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/health-fitness/health-news/long-coronavirus-symptoms-3-possible-signs-of-long-covid-as-per-cdc-doctor/photostory/82326989.cms
Please note: This is a commercial profile
© 2019.
This work is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND.
Contributor Details
Most people like to spend time outdoors on sunny days.
Too much sun exposure, however, can have serious consequences.
These can include:
Sunburn
Dehydration
Hyponatremia , or water intoxication
, or water intoxication Heat exhaustion
Heatstroke
This article looks at some of the consequences of spending too much time in the sun.
It also discusses some of the ways sun-related conditions can be treated.
Science Photo Library / Getty Images
Sunburn
Sunburn is a common skin injury.
It is caused by excess exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun.
The injury happens when UV radiation directly damages the DNA in skin cells, triggering an inflammatory response.
The damaged cells die and shed, which is what causes the peeling and flaking of skin.
Sunburn Symptoms
Common symptoms of sunburn include:
Reddish skin
Pain
Swelling
Fatigue
Hot skin temperatures
Pain and redness tend to be greatest during the first six to 48 hours.
In severe cases, you may also have:
Rash
Nausea
Fever
Dizziness
Chills
If these symptoms occur, contact your doctor.
Second-degree sunburns are more serious.
Symptoms include:
Blistering
Oozing
Dehydration
Edema, or swelling of tissue
Fainting
When You're at Risk
Sunburns don't only happen on hot summer days.
You can get a sunburn even on a snowy or overcast day.
You can reduce your risk by using sunscreen and sun-protective clothing.
Remember that it only takes 15 minutes of direct sun exposure to cause a sunburn.
Over time, excessive sun exposure can cause long-term problems, including: Skin damage
Premature skin aging
Skin cancer A history of severe sunburn gives you a 2.4-fold increase in your risk of squamous cell carcinoma and a 1.5-fold increase in the risk of melanoma.
Treating Sunburn
Mild sunburn can be treated at home with a cool bath or shower, cool compresses, and an over-the-counter moisturizing cream.
For pain, you can take an over-the-counter pain reliever like Advil (ibuprofen) or Tylenol (acetaminophen).
If blisters form, do not break them.
Dehydration
Dehydration occurs when your body loses too many fluids or electrolytes.
This can interfere with your normal body functions.
On hot days, you may become dehydrated when you're not taking in as many fluids as you're losing.
Symptoms of Dehydration
Most healthy people can tolerate between a 3% to 4% loss of body water without symptoms.
After 5%, you may develop:
Dizziness
Headaches
Fatigue
As the water loss exceeds 10%, severe symptoms can develop, including:
Decreased urination
Confusion
Seizures
Treating Dehydration
Mild dehydration will usually resolve when you drink water or an electrolyte-rich sports drink.
The best way to avoid dehydration is to drink before you get thirsty.
This is especially important if you plan to be in the sun for a long period or are overexerting yourself.
Recap
Dehydration happens when your body loses more fluids and electrolytes than it takes in.
You can avoid dehydration by drinking an electrolyte-rich sports drink before you start to feel thirsty.
Hyponatremia
The opposite of dehydration is hyponatremia.
This is sometimes also called "water intoxication.
"
Dehydration isn't just water loss.
When you're dehydrated, your electrolytes also become imbalanced.
Hyponatremia can occur when you lose a lot of water through sweat but you don't replace lost sodium when you rehydrate.
Hyponatremia Symptoms
Hyponatremia can happen when you lose too much fluid but only drink water.
Unless you replace the lost sodium, you may experience the following symptoms:
Headache
Fatigue
Lethargy
Loss of appetite
Irritability
Muscle weakness
Cramps
Confusion
Treating Hyponatremia
Mild hyponatremia will usually resolve when you drink an electrolyte-rich sports drink.
Severe cases need to be treated by emergency care providers.
These cases are usually treated with a 3% saline solution delivered into a vein.
Recap Drinking too much water when you're dehydrated can cause water intoxication.
To avoid this, replace fluids with an electrolyte-rich sports drink.
Heat Exhaustion
Dehydration with prolonged sun or heat exposure can cause heat exhaustion.
This happens when the body's core temperature rises above 98.6° but not above 104°.
It typically occurs on hot, humid days when you're overexerting yourself.
Risk of Heat Exhaustion
Dehydration and obesity greatly increase the risk of heat exhaustion.
Other factors that can contribute include:
Alcohol use
Caffeine use
Use of certain drugs like diuretics, antihistamines, beta-blockers, alcohol, ecstasy, and amphetamines
Babies and the elderly are at greatest risk.
This is because their bodies aren't as good at adjusting to temperature changes.
Heat Exhaustion Symptoms
Common symptoms include:
Dizziness
Headache
Nausea
Thirst
Weakness
High body temperature
Profuse sweating
Decreased urination
Vomiting
Treating Heat Exhaustion
If someone you know has heat exhaustion:
Move them to a cool place
Remove any excess clothing
Bring down their body temperature by fanning or placing cool, wet towels on their skin
Offer water or a sports drink if they can keep fluids down
If dizziness occurs, have them lie on their back and elevate their feet
If symptoms don't improve after 15 minutes, call 911 or seek emergency medical care.
Left untreated, heat exhaustion can lead to heatstroke.
Heatstroke
Heatstroke is also known as sunstroke.
It is a more severe form of heat exhaustion.
When you have heatstroke, your body's core temperature exceeds 104°.
Heatstroke causes more than 600 deaths in the United States each year.
There are two different types of heatstroke:
Exertional heatstroke, caused by excessive exertion in hot temperatures
Non-exertional or "classic" heatstroke, caused by conditions that interfere with your body's ability to regulate its temperature
Causes of Heatstroke
Common risk factors for classic heatstroke include:
Younger age
Older age
Alcohol use
Stimulant use
Use of certain medications
Death from heatstroke often occurs when younger children or the elderly are left in parked cars in direct sunlight.
On a hot day, temperatures inside a parked car can quickly climb to 124° to 153°.
Heatstroke Symptoms
Symptoms of heatstroke are more profound than heat exhaustion.
They can differ based on whether you have exertional or classic heatstroke.
For example, sweating is typical with exertional heatstroke but not with classic heatstroke.
Other symptoms may include:
Rapid breathing
Fast, weak pulse
Nausea and vomiting
Confusion or delirium
Hostility
Intoxication-like behavior
Fainting and unconsciousness
Seizures, especially in children
As symptoms advance, skin can suddenly take on a bluish tinge.
This happens as blood vessels narrow and restrict blood flow and oxygen exchange.
Left untreated, heatstroke can lead to:
Organ failure
Rhabdomyolysis, the breakdown of skeletal muscle
Death
Treating Heatstroke
Heatstroke is an emergency.
Treatment involves:
Rapidly cooling the body
Oral and IV rehydration
Standard resuscitation measures by trained medical professionals
Recap Heat stroke is the most severe form of heat exhaustion.
It can happen when you overexert yourself in hot weather or are exposed to extremely hot conditions.
If you suspect heatstroke, seek medical care at once.
Summary
Too much time in the hot sun can lead to a number of health conditions.
This includes sunburn, dehydration, hyponatremia, heat exhaustion, and heatstroke.
You can avoid these conditions by taking the right precautions.
Use sunscreen and sun-protective clothing.
Replace lost fluids and electrolytes with a sports drink.
Learn to recognize the symptoms of heat exhaustion and heat stroke and avoid exerting yourself in hot, humid weather.
Gastroenterology Burning mouth syndrome: Why doctors sometimes fight its fire with fire Sharon Theimer
Share this:
Menopause is a risk factor for painful condition, Mayo Clinic Healthcare expert explains
LONDON — Hot flashes, mood swings and sleep problems are common as a woman approaches and passes menopause.
Much less common but as disruptive is another condition that can afflict perimenopausal and postmenopausal women: burning mouth syndrome.
Sarmed Sami, MBChB, a gastroenterologist at Mayo Clinic Healthcare in London, describes the painful condition, how it is diagnosed and why doctors sometimes fight its fire with fire.
"Burning mouth syndrome can affect swallowing, eating, speech and sleep," Dr. Sami says.
"There's a lot more to it than your mouth feeling uncomfortable.
In addition to affecting your quality of life, it can affect various aspects of your health.
"
Sarmed Sami, MBChB
Burning mouth syndrome can include a burning feeling in the tongue, lips, gums, throat, or roof of the mouth.
Other symptoms may be thirst, a dry mouth, a bitter or metallic taste in the mouth, loss of taste and mouth tingling, stinging or numbness.
The frequency of symptoms can vary widely, from all day every day to sporadic.
Treatment involves addressing symptoms and the cause, Dr. Sami says.
For example, if the burning mouth syndrome is likely related to menopause, hormone replacement therapy may help.
Other potential underlying conditions include gastro-oesophageal reflux, thyroid problems, vitamin deficiencies, and irritation from toothpaste, mouthwash or acidic foods and beverages.
The cause cannot always be identified.
"We use medications to essentially calm down the nerves and sensors in the mouth, because we think there is hypersensitivity," Dr. Sami says.
"Stress can also cause it, so we may use complementary therapies such as acupuncture.
"
Other therapies may include hot sauce, also known as pepper sauce: "There are certain chemicals that help reduce sensitivity.
Hot sauce may seem counterintuitive, but it has capsaicin, which can help relieve burning pain in nerves," Dr. Sami says.
Factors that put people at the highest risk for burning mouth include being female, perimenopausal or postmenopausal, over 50 and smoking.
Secondary factors that can raise risk include recent illness; medical conditions such as fibromyalgia, Parkinson's disease, autoimmune diseases and neuropathy; dental work; food allergies; some medicines; and stress, anxiety, depression and traumatic life events.
In addition to medical treatment, burning mouth symptoms may be eased by lifestyle changes and other self-help measures.
Those include drinking plenty of liquids; sucking on ice chips; avoiding acidic foods and liquids such as tomatoes, orange juice, carbonated beverages, and coffee; avoiding alcohol; avoiding spicy foods; refraining from tobacco use; avoiding products with cinnamon or mint; and using mild or flavor-free toothpastes.
Working to reduce stress and relax can also help.
###
About Mayo Clinic Healthcare
Mayo Clinic Healthcare, located in London, is a wholly owned subsidiary of Mayo Clinic, a not-for-profit academic medical center.
Mayo Clinic is ranked the No. 1 hospital by U.S. News & World Report for a reason: quality of care.
Mayo Clinic Healthcare is the U.K.’s front door to that unparalleled experience.
Visit Mayo Clinic Healthcare for more information.
Media contact:
Sharon Theimer, Mayo Clinic Communications, newsbureau@mayo.edu
Related Articles
While Thanksgiving likely felt the most normal it has since the days before the COVID-19 pandemic, considerable spread of the flu, RSV and COVID-19 has many Americans wondering what they should do if they're feeling under the weather after a holiday gathering.
According to one public health expert, it may not be a bad idea to test even if you're not feeling any symptoms following a Thanksgiving get-together.
With the incubation periods of the current prevalent strains of the omicron variant ranging from four to five days, testing during the incubation period is recommended for all who attended a gathering.
"Even if one has no symptoms, I would certainly test on day three and then test again at day five.
If one looks at the CDC guidelines, it actually says if you don't have symptoms to test on day five so that you don't miss that incubation period," Dr. Sharon Welbel said.
Welbel is the director of Hospital Epidemiology and Infection Control for Cook County Health.
Welbel added that those who are feeling asymptomatic and have been testing for COVID are unlikely to have the virus if they continue to test negative and remain symptom-free five days after exposure.
A PCR test remains the best option to ensure accuracy.
Some individuals are feeling sick after their Thanksgiving gathering but have returned several negative COVID tests.
With the current prevalence of the flu and RSV, a COVID test may not be the only test you need to take if you're feeling sick.
With different therapies and treatments existing for COVID-19 and influenza, Welbel said that knowing which one you have if you are sick can both help ensure the best possible treatment for the patient while helping keep those in public settings safer.
Welbel said that testing for the viruses is available at primary care providers, and stressed that getting tested for the viruses can help ensure the patient receives the proper therapy for either COVID-19 or influenza.
Does your child not like some clothing or food because of the texture?
Are they overly sensitive to loud noises?
Do they prefer to play alone or hide from others?
These are some early and common signs of autism spectrum disorder.
Sometimes, parents notice that their child regresses from a milestone they’ve already met or doesn’t meet a milestone at the rate you’d expect for children their age.
Autism spectrum disorder is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder.
Children with autism often have difficulties in functioning and development.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that one in 36 children in the United States has a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder.
When Cat Stevens sang “Morning has broken,” the lyrics were referring to the rejuvenation of the sunrise.
That doesn’t happen for me as someone with Parkinson’s disease.
It starts with what I call the 4 a.m. four-alarm wake-up call.
It’s head-to-toe body pain, sweating, and an erection that demands something be done about it.
Then comes the histamine flicker, and I’m sneezing and dripping like a leaky faucet.
This is followed by vertigo, nausea, and back and neck pain with slowed, clumsy movement.
That’s not a morning rejuvenation.
I face this chaotic morning with a cup of hot chocolate.
Between sips of velvety cocoa, my thoughts are tossed on tumultuous seas, flitting from one wave to the next.
Everything needs to be addressed now!
Find the cats (we have three) to be sure everyone’s needs are met.
Weed the garden, help Mrs. Dr. C with her projects, write a column, work on the next book, and practice the Parkinson’s self-management toolkit.
My brain has a cacophony of noise, but the chronic, physical distress also is yelling at me.
If it’s a bad morning, my body cannot function in synchronicity with my brain, and movements are both slow and painful.
Recommended Reading 11 Facts About Parkinson’s Disease You May Not Know
I surmise that, given my intense off-period symptoms, I’m not particularly objective in the morning.
Mood fluctuations are reported in up to two-thirds of Parkinson’s patients who experience motor fluctuations, as noted in a 2001 article published in the Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences.
According to the article’s abstract, “Most researchers indicate that mood fluctuations tend to be associated with motor fluctuations in that patients experience decreased mood when ‘off’ (immobile) and elevated mood when ‘on’ (mobile).”
Mornings start with some variation on these events.
What’s worse, I can waste the day spinning, flitting, and grasping in this busy physical and mental state.
In fact, it’s amazingly easy.
I just give up and let the disease take over, laying aside my self-management strategies.
But letting the disease take over is a fuse lit on a potential bonfire.
I want to avoid that, so I take time to relax every morning.
My relaxed mental state is, to a degree, a normal, default brain state.
Unfortunately, my default brain is malfunctioning with Parkinson’s.
I find that the more I use this dysfunctional mental state, the worse it gets.
So the question I face every morning is, “Do I want the rest of my day to be like this?”
You would think the answer would be obvious, but because of the culturally accepted and endorsed Parkinson’s “sick role” (a role that identifies attributes of living with a chronic illness), we haven’t made much progress on Parkinson’s self-management.
Parkinson’s is often seen as a horrible “death sentence.”
Self-management seeks to steer away from this sick role and replace it with possibility based in science and hard work.
Mrs. Dr. C will tell you that when I (or we) can’t follow the calm morning rituals, then it’s difficult to get back on track the rest of the day.
It’s more difficult to use the self-management tools once the cascade has begun.
It’s also rewarding to practice a set of tools that help steer a bad morning into a tolerable day I can share with my partner.
A scoping review published this month in the Journal of Medical Internet Research focused on Parkinson’s self-management.
A scoping review allows researchers to assess emerging evidence and propose a first step in research development.
The review looks at current applications of self-management tools on motor issues.
(Unfortunately, nonmotor symptoms weren’t included.)
Researchers conclude:
“This scoping review identified a wide variety of interventions designed to support various aspects of self-management for people with Parkinson disease.
The studies all generally reported positive results, and although the strength of the evidence varied, it suggests that self-management interventions are promising for improving the care and outcomes of people with Parkinson disease.”
The goal of a future self-management toolkit would be, as the authors state, to eventually teach self-management strategies to patients.
We need to expand our efforts to include nonmotor issues.
But first, we need a beginning toolkit to test.
I’m testing this one on myself.
My first step is to dedicate myself to practicing my Parkinson’s self-management toolkit every morning
so I don’t have to forfeit the rest of the day.
It should be first on my morning to-do list.
Granted, it’s been difficult to make self-management happen consistently.
I have so many obstacles that hamper my making Parkinson’s self-management a daily ritual.
Mornings are broken, but I can change the day with self-management tools and the gains I make with insight meditation.
I can even the playing field.
I can steer my Parkinson’s so that I’m starting my day in a better frame of mind and body.
Note:
Parkinson’s News
Today is strictly a news and information website about the disease.
It does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment.
This content is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment.
Always seek the advice of your physician or another qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition.
Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website.
The opinions expressed in this column are not those of Parkinson’s News Today or its parent company, BioNews, and are intended to spark discussion about issues pertaining to Parkinson’s disease.
After a successful campaign in March this year, summer trip sales went up by 70% in Sweden – KLM Royal Dutch Airlines together with creative agency partner M&C Saatchi Stockholm now follow up with a more high tech approach: The refund billboard.
By detecting cold symptoms the billboard can effectively remind Swedes that for whatever reason, may it be a cold or a change of heart, KLM’s flight bookings can be cancelled at no cost.
”Our full refund policy is a caring move that allows travellers to safely book their tickets and dare to dream about travelling again.
The listening billboard is a fun way to highlight that”, says Maria Hagelberg, Marketing Manager KLM North Europe.
The billboard, equipped with a listening device and an AI motor, identifies 40 000 cough and sneeze sounds.
When a symptom sound is detected KLMs general travel billboard, with a lovely surf destination at a low price, switches to: ”Unwell?” or ”Bless you!” followed by ”Cancel €0”.
The billboard technology was developed together with outdoor solution agency Havelle and integrated into a Clear Channel adshel in the city center of Stockholm.
Source: M&C Saatchi Stockholm
Doctors discovered an 'angry looking' 27cm tumour growing on her ovaries
A social worker who was diagnosed with ovarian cancer at the age of 27 after doctors found a tumour the 'size of a rugby ball' growing in her abdomen has revealed the symptoms every woman should know.
Monika Tasic had always lived an active, outdoor lifestyle, hiking with her boyfriend Tim and playing soccer with her local team in Western Sydney four times a week.
The super-fit care worker - who also performed with a dance troupe and ate well 'most of the time' - was 'shocked' when a patient asked if she was pregnant, having noticed her stomach steadily swelling in the months leading up to September 2017.
Troubled by the observation, Ms Tasic saw a GP who expressed immediate concern about the bloating and referred her for an internal ultrasound.
Four weeks later, doctors discovered an 'angry looking' 27cm tumour - longer than a 600ml soft drink bottle - growing from one of her ovaries and she was diagnosed with stage 2B ovarian cancer.
Ms Tasic, now 30 and newly engaged to her partner of nine years, told Daily Mail Australia that cancer has taught her to 'stop and smell the roses, even when they're a bit wilted'.
Scroll down for video
Australian social worker Monika Tasic (pictured) had always lived an active, outdoor lifestyle, hiking with fiancé Tim and playing soccer four times a week with a team in Western Sydney
Ms Tasic was diagnosed with stage 2B ovarian cancer aged 27 after scans detected a 27cm tumour growing from one of her ovaries into her fallopian tubes and the lining of her uterus
In hindsight, Ms Tasic said she recalls feeling bloated and lethargic for months before her diagnosis, waking in the middle of the night to use the bathroom and becoming full after eating tiny amounts of food - all small but telltale signs of ovarian cancer.
'If I ate an apple for lunch, I wouldn't need to eat dinner,' she said.
Being diagnosed with cancer in her twenties was an experience Ms Tasic describes as 'earth-shaking'.
'As soon as the word left the doctors mouth, I could feel it ricochet around the room, through my head, through my heart and eventually it landed in my gut,' she said.
'Cancer doesn't really have a face until it's your own, or someone that you know and love.'
By stage 2B, ovarian cancer is growing in one or both ovaries and has spread elsewhere within the pelvis.
In Ms Tasic's case, it had crept into her fallopian tubes and the lining of her uterus.
Ms Tasic (pictured with fiancé Tim in July 2020) says cancer has taught her to 'stop and smell the roses, even when they're a bit wilted'
Doctors prescribed a course of BEP, a gruelling form of chemotherapy which sees patients receive 38 infusions in the space of nine weeks.
Ms Tasic describes the treatment as 'short, effective and disgusting'.
She suffered from debilitating nausea and anxiety while struggling with a constant metallic taste in her mouth - one of the most common side effects of chemo.
'It really was something I had to take day by day.
I learnt a lot of patience in that time,' Ms Tasic said.
Treatment proved successful, eliminating all traces of the insidious disease.
Now cancer-free, Ms Tasic prefers to live in the present to avoid worrying about the chances of her illness recurring.
'It would be a disservice to the people that got me here to dwell on what could happen tomorrow when I've been gifted today,' she said.
Brave Ms Tasic (pictured during treatment) suffered from debilitating nausea and anxiety while struggling with a constant metallic taste in her mouth throughout chemotherapy
Ms Tasic's brush with ovarian cancer has inspired her to advocate for further research into the disease which has claimed the lives of an estimated 1,068 Australian women in 2020, figures from the government health department show.
It is the sixth most common cause of death from cancer among Australian women, behind lung, bowel, stomach, liver and breast.
Ovarian cancer is notoriously difficult to detect because early stage symptoms are vague and easily confused with those of less sinister illnesses like irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).
Ms Tasic (pictured with fiancé Tim) said she prefers to live in the present to avoid dwelling on the chance of her illness recurring
Common warning signs of ovarian cancer include abdominal bloating, feeling full after small amounts of food, an urgent need to urinate and constipation, as well as indigestion, fatigue and pain during sex.
Sufferers may also experience pain in the lower back, stomach or pelvis and sudden, unexplained weight loss.
Unlike cervical, breast and colon cancer, there are no screening programmes for ovarian cancer.
A specialist blood test that detects the CA125 protein - which is produced by ovarian cancer cells - can be used to diagnose the disease.
However a slew of conditions including menstruation, endometriosis and benign ovarian cysts also cause this protein to develop, meaning the test alone cannot be used to confirm the presence or absence of cancer.
In addition more than 50 percent of women with early stage ovarian cancer do not show elevated CA125 levels, which means internal ultrasounds must be performed in conjunction with the blood test for a conclusive diagnosis.
Causes of ovarian cancer - Ageing (risk increases for women over 50) - Family history of ovarian, breast or bowel cancer - Early onset of periods (before 12 years) and late menopause - Childlessness - Infertility - Women who had their first child after the age of 35 - Never taking oral contraceptives - Using oestrogen only hormone replacement therapy Source: Cancer Council Australia Advertisement
Symptoms of ovarian cancer -
Abdominal bloating - Difficulty eating or feeling full quickly - Frequent or urgent urination - Back, abdominal or pelvic pain - Constipation or diarrhoea - Menstrual irregularities - Fatigue - Indigestion - Pain during sex - Unexplained weight loss or weight gain Source: Cancer Council Australia Advertisement
All types of ovarian cancer are highly treatable if the patient receives care in the initial stages, but mortality rates remain high due to the lack of effective measures for early detection.
Eager to help others avoid the ordeal she endured, Ms Tasic urges women to take ownership of their bodies and seek a second opinion if they feel dissatisfied with a diagnosis.
'At the end of the day all our bodies are different, and what was a symptom for me may not be for someone else,' she said.
'No sign is too small, it's just so much better to be safe than sorry.
Advocate for the healthcare you deserve.'
For more information on ovarian cancer, please visit the Australian Cancer Council website.
Leaving AARP.org Website
You are now leaving AARP.org and going to a website that is not operated by AARP.
A different privacy policy and terms of service will apply.
Research Student, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada.
Research Assistant, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada.
Department of Medicine, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada.
Department of Supportive Care, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Canada
Side effects.
Canadian Cancer Society.
2023.
https://cancer.ca/en/treatments/side-effects.
Accessed April 06, 2023.
Basch E, Rocque G, Mody G, Mullangi S, Patt D. Tenets for implementing electronic patient-reported outcomes for remote symptom monitoring during cancer treatment.
JCO clinical cancer informatics 2023;7.
Remote symptom monitoring (RSM) is one of several approaches that may help examine patterns of treatment toxicities in depth and/or detect early disease progression in older adult populations receiving cancer treatments.
RSM can be defined as the frequent collection of patient-reported outcomes in a consecutive timeframe.
RSM can help clinicians identify emerging symptoms, such as fatigue or nausea,¹ to prevent further complications and reduce the impact on quality of life.
In this study, older adults starting one of three treatments for metastatic prostate cancer (chemotherapy, androgen-receptor axis targeted therapies (ARAT), or radium-223) at one of two comprehensive cancer centers in Toronto, Canada participated in RSM.
Participants completed the Edmonton Symptom Assessment Scale (ESAS) online or by phone during the first cycle of treatment (3 weeks for patients starting chemotherapy and 4 weeks for those starting an ARAT (enzalutamide or abiraterone) or radium-223).
The ESAS is a widely used cancer symptom screening tool that assesses 9 core physical and mental health symptoms on a scale from 0 (none) to 10 (worst possible).
When patients rated their symptoms as severe (ESAS >7) or worsening symptoms (increased by at least 2 points), a more detailed questionnaire specific to the symptom was sent.
If specific cut-offs scores suggesting severe symptoms were met, the nurse and oncologist were notified.
Participants were also advised to visit the emergency department or contact a nurse at the genitourinary clinic of their primary hospital or an after-hours oncology nursing line.
Although RSM has demonstrated its success in improving quality of life and reducing hospitalizations in adult populations with cancer undergoing chemotherapy², it is not yet common practice.
Given that RSM can be implemented using existing technology (automated telephone systems, emailed e-surveys, etc),² understanding whether it is feasible and acceptable among older adults; who may struggle with a digital interface compared to their younger counterparts; was the primary objective of this study.
90 participants completed the study with 34 undergoing chemotherapy, 43 an ARAT therapy, and 13 treated with radium-223.
The average participant was aged 77 years, considered frail (58% scored greater than or equal to 3 on the VES-13), and were at least somewhat comfortable with using a smartphone or the internet.
Response rates of over 90% were observed for both daily and weekly questionnaires.
Most notifications sent to the oncology team (97%) were acknowledged, with 28% of cases resulting in consultation with a nurse, 15% resulting in medication counseling, and 9% resulting in a specialist referral.
Outcomes such as an ER visit and consultation with an after-hours nurse were also observed but could not be fully captured in this study.
Table 1: Participant’s qualitative feedback regarding participating in daily remote symptom monitoring (RSM).A 95% patient satisfaction rating was reported for the use of RSM, demonstrating the acceptance of RSM among older adults living with cancer.
Most responders (66%) indicated that taking part in the study had advantages, such as the psychological benefits of talking to someone about their health, engaging in healthy behaviors, and becoming cognizant of their symptom trajectories.
Participants also reported enjoyment in contributing to research as detailed in Table 1.
Participants in the study also reported some challenges with digital literacy (e.g., failing to check questionnaire emails or difficulty navigating the survey website) as well as with study logistics (e.g., the timeliness of email-delivered surveys, difficulties quantifying symptoms on a scale, and the length of the questionnaires).
These lessons begin to reveal how RSM can be adapted to fit the needs of older adults living with cancer.
There are also some limitations to this study.
We did not explore patient-related health outcomes of RSM (e.g., treatment changes, healthcare use, etc.), which is necessary to determine the full utility of RSM.
Since we did not conduct RSM outside of regular working hours and beyond one treatment cycle, this may have affected the outcome of alerts and completion/retention rates.
Finally, although response rates for interviews were high, it is possible that participants who declined to be interviewed were less satisfied with the study.
It is important to note that the short length of the intervention may have influenced response rates and is a key limitation.
Therefore, further studies over longer periods are warranted to understand the applications of RSM in the geriatric oncology landscape.
Overall, RSM was shown to be a feasible and acceptable intervention for older adults undergoing cancer treatment.
Although most participants opted for web-based monitoring, 38% preferred traditional telephone monitoring.
As such, both web-based and phone-based operations should be considered when designing RSM interventions, which can not only be applied to older adults but to those undergoing various cancer treatments.
Written by: Sapeda R. Said Muhammad,Sanchiv Suresh,Gregory Feng,Milothy Parthipan,Henriette Breunis,Shabbir M.H. AlibhaiReferences:
Peg Quann
pquann@couriertimes.com
Pennsylvania is seeing an uptick in emergency visits for tick bites as more people are taking to outdoor recreational activities, including hikes, while social distancing.
State Secretary of Health Rachel Levine reminded residents to take proper steps to prevent tick bites that can lead to Lyme disease, which has symptoms similar to COVID-19.
“Over the past several months, we have seen an increase in the number of emergency department visits related to tick bites,” Levine said.
“Some symptoms of Lyme disease, such as fever, chills and headache, are similar to symptoms of COVID-19.
It is essential that all residents know the proper ways to protect themselves against ticks and are aware of the dangerous diseases they can carry.
We want all Pennsylvanians to get outside and be healthy but do so in the safest way possible.”
While there is no antibiotic treatment recommended for mild cases of COVID-19, Lyme disease needs to be diagnosed and treated with antibiotics early to prevent serious long-term complications, including arthritis and heart ailments.
Testing to determine the cause of the symptoms is important, both to prevent the spread of the highly contagious coronavirus, and to determine if the person could have Lyme disease.
“We certainly want people to visit the doctor for other ailments other than COVID, if needed,” said Nate Wardle, health department press secretary.
Preliminary data show that more than 8,500 cases of Lyme disease were reported in Pennsylvania in 2019.
The department is continuing to compile complete Lyme disease data, and final numbers for 2019 should be available within the next month.
Over time, if not treated, Lyme disease can lead to severe symptoms that affect the heart, nervous system and joints.
You are at risk of attracting ticks any time you are outside, but especially in wooded and bushy areas or areas with high grass and leaf litter, and even in your own yard.
To reduce your chances of a tick bite:
• Walk in the center of trails and avoid areas with high grass and leaf litter;
• Use a repellent that contains at least 20% DEET;
•
Wear light-colored clothing;
• Conduct full-body tick checks on yourself and on your pets after spending time outdoors; and
• Take a bath or shower within 2 hours after coming indoors.
If you have been bitten by a tick, make sure to monitor the area for any kinds of symptoms and contact your health care provider immediately.
Symptoms of Lyme disease can include a red, swollen bulls-eye shaped rash, fever, chills, headache, fatigue, muscle and joint aches and swollen lymph nodes.
Some of these symptoms are the same for COVID-19, that is why testing is so important, officials said.
COVID-19 can also cause shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, diarrhea, sore throat and loss of the sense of taste or smell.
Early stage symptoms of Lyme may appear in as few as two days or as long as 30 days after exposure.
Later stage symptoms like arthritis, heart and neurological issues may appear months later.
Reported illnesses have ranged from people with few to no symptoms to people being severely ill and dying.
All Pennsylvania residents are encouraged to sign up for AlertPA, a text notification system for health, weather, and other important alerts like COVID-19 updates from commonwealth agencies.
Residents can sign up online at www.ready.pa.gov/BeInformed/Signup-For-Alerts.
For more information on COVID-19, as well as ticks and Lyme disease, and mosquitoes and West Nile virus, visit the Department of Health website at www.health.pa.gov or follow the department on Facebook and Twitter.
More than one-third of Americans are unable to properly absorb lactose, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDKD).
The symptoms related to lactose intolerance that we most commonly think of are gastrointestinal-related, including bloating, cramping, and more severe digestion signals.
However, a registered dietitian is speaking about another lesser-known symptom of lactose intolerance, which is prompting some entertainers and professional athletes to overhaul their diets.
Read on to learn more about this surprising symptom, and don't miss One Major Side Effect of an Unhealthy Diet for Women, Says Science.
What are the most common symptoms of lactose intolerance?
If you or someone you care about has a sensitivity to dairy, you may be aware of the discomfort that comes along with it.
The NIDDKD cites "bloating, diarrhea, and gas" as three common symptoms associated with lactose intolerance.
The Worst Foods for IBS, According to Dietitians
What happens when someone is lactose intolerant?
For the estimated 36% of individuals who are lactose-intolerant, the NIDDKD explains what's happening inside the body:
"Lactose is a sugar that is naturally found in milk and milk products like cheese or ice cream.
In lactose intolerance, digestive symptoms are caused by lactose malabsorption.
Lactose malabsorption is a condition in which your small intestine cannot digest, or break down, all the lactose you eat or drink.
"
Lactose intolerance is not a milk allergy.
"Lactose intolerance is different from a milk allergy," the NIDDKD explains.
"A milk allergy is an immune system disorder."
(FYI: Milk allergies are "the most distressing of the food allergies" these days—even more so than nuts.)
Here's the big reveal . . .
Digestive symptoms aren't the only indicators of lactose intolerance, according to dietitian Heather Ray, M.S., R.D.
In an article for the plant-based news site The Beet, Ray reveals there's another symptom of lactose intolerance that we mistake for sinus problems or allergies.
"One way to know if you're sensitive or allergic to dairy products is to pay attention to how much mucus your body is producing," she writes.
RELATED:
The One Part of Your Body You're Not Washing
But Should
Some athletes and music superstars are doing away with dairy.
Ray writes, "A lot of celebrities and professional athletes are ditching dairy to help their sinuses right now, and mucus is one big reason why.
"6254a4d1642c605c54bf1cab17d50f1e
Two pro athletes who cut dairy for its lactose intolerance-related effects are NBA star Jrue Holiday and former soccer star Lauren Holiday.
The husband and wife picked up dairy alternatives after their child was diagnosed with lactose intolerance.
"Sometimes, when I drink dairy, I get a lot of mucus build-up," Jrue, who is also a fan of the plant-based JUST Egg, said.
"And since I've been off dairy, it's been gone.
I feel better, lighter, and I have more energy.
"
Chloe x Halle say ditching dairy improved their vocals.
Chloe x Halle, the Grammy-nominated R&B duo, shared in a PETA interview that going vegan upped their vocal game at performances.
Rita Ora Sunbathes in Orange Bikini and Here's Her Exact Diet
Not to mention, the No. 1 tennis player in the world, Novak Djokovic.
Novak Djokovic thought his breathing issues were caused by allergies, and he even went so far as to have surgery, according to The Beet.
Instead:
"Novak Djokovic . .
.
reported issues with persistent allergies, even undergoing surgery to help him breathe better.
When the combination of changing his workouts with nasal surgery didn't bring relief, he sought help from a doctor who analyzed his diet and discovered a list of foods he was reacting to, including gluten, dairy, and refined sugar.
After making dietary changes and cutting out dairy, Djokovic reported feeling better immediately.
"
If sinus and congestion issues just don't seem to clear up, it may be worth asking your doctor about lactose.
Sign up for the Eat This, Not That!
newsletter to get the nutrition news you can use, and check out 9 Signs of Lactose Intolerance You Should Never Ignore.
Keep reading:
1.
Art-K’uh
There is no word in the Mayan languages to signify “art.”
When contemporary indigenous artists, educated in Western metropolitan art schools, started to look for a term for art in their languages, many different ideas were proposed.
Naoj in Kaqchikel refers, in a general sense, to “knowledge-wisdom-understanding”; X’ajaan in Tz’utujiil connotes sacred feelings and respect ; and K’uh in Q’eqchi refers to something that is imbued with “a sacred state of thinking-feeling.”
This equivalence of the sacred in Mayan spiritual practices with Western conceptions of art symptomatizes how the latter still reserves a sacred sense for art, even if inexplicitly.
Art is preserved and displayed in museological temples, where paradigmatic artworks are exhibited as altars to be worshipped.
When indigenous artists translate the meaning of art with “sacred” connotations (X’ajaan or K’uh), the process reveals the latent cultish devotion to objects that remains in the Western art circuit.
Throughout Western history, questions regarding the role of art and its sacred status, whether conferred through religion or so-called secular means, have formed battlegrounds.
The idea of the “sacred” or “transcendental” in art in Western culture has most clearly manifested itself in the expropriation of objects from non-Western communities.
This occurred most explicitly during the colonial era, when “foreign” objects were plundered and then placed in museum collections as demonstrations of national power—a practice that became especially commonplace in the nineteenth century.
Yet, even though it is less pronounced now, this process of designating something other than Western art as “sacred” in order to exercise power continues today in various other forms.
For example, in her recent book Potential History:
Unlearning Imperialism (2019), filmmaker and theorist Ariella Azoulay remarks that turning an ethnographic artifact into a (transcendental) piece of art necessarily involves a process of salvaging, classifying, preserving, authenticating, evaluating, and handling it.
She notes that there is an implicit expertise and claim of scientific “neutrality” when non-Western artifacts are turned into transcendental, elevated, and universal artworks in the Western sense.
This process of conversion also legitimizes the historic theft of these objects and their isolation from the communities and cultural contexts in which they were produced.
This is “constitutive of the various scholarly, curatorial and professional procedures (in which collecting is but one example) which have transformed world-destroying violence into a decent and acceptable occupation.”
For this reason, Azoulay proposes a different potential art historical narrative that can account for the history of plunder, in which the act of creating (art historical) knowledge has itself been a medium of colonization.
This narrative has been the subject of several artistic and curatorial practices since the end of 1980s that fostered complex debates on the complicities between colonization, museums, and academia.
For two instances, the artwork of artist Fred Wilson and exhibitions by curator Susan Vogel—who have both experimented with the display of ethnographic artifacts in different kinds of exhibition rooms (white cubes, ethnographic suitcases, nineteenth-century-style exhibition salons)—demonstrate the colonial violence of reducing artifacts to objects of study, consumption, or contemplation as “transcendental art.”
However, the art historical canon has not always been inclined to question its methodologies and discipline along the lines that Azoulay so brilliant outlines.
Antonio Pichilla, Abuelo (grandfather), 2015.
Courtesy of the artist.
Photo:
Rene De Carufel.
2. Translation as Method
Following from the translation of art as K’uh, and its allusions to the “sacred,” this text is a modest record of encounters between Western and non-Western apparatuses of knowledge as places of untranslatability and instigation.
I intend to question whether translation is an appropriate tool of communication when it comes to making other epistemologies comprehensible and visible.
Spirituality will be my indicator—the measure and thermometer—for identifying the limits of translation as a method not only for knowing, but also for communication between Western and non-Western contexts.
The senses of culture and politics may be so different between different cosmologies that they cannot ever be fully translated.
For a generation of postcolonial artists and theorists since the 1980s, translation is knowledge and knowledge is translation.
Scholars like Homi K. Bhabha, Boaventura de Sousa Santos, Walter Mignolo, Gloria Alzandúa, Haroldo de Campos, Édouard Glissant, and many others are interested in the process of translation as a site of negotiation.
For them, translation is a means to challenge obsessive modern European purity, changing the paradigm to allow for hybrid cultural identities.
For Glissant, for example, translation is a tool for re-negotiating places of utterance that could “barbarize” or “creolize” European intellectual production.
Alzaldúa speaks from personal experience, describing how she inhabits two languages and cultures simultaneously and lives on the borderline between them.
Bhabha sees translation as a place of dissidence and negotiation.
His classic text “Signs Taken for Wonders: Questions of Ambivalence and Authority under a Tree Outside Delhi, May 1817” parodies nineteenth-century colonizers’ panic about the mistranslations of the “European book” (the Bible) by the colonized.
Mistranslating the book, writes Bhabha, was a method of caricaturing Western culture: Indian spiritual leaders may have used the translated bibles distributed to them, but clarified to missionaries: “To all the other customs of Christians we are willing to conform, but not to the Sacrament, because Europeans eat cow’s flesh, and this will never do for us.”
For Bhabha, as with most of the authors mentioned, translation is a metaphor for the “in-between” postcolonial condition, but in order to translate their findings, such authors often had no choice but to present them in the language of metropolitan intellectuals in order to validate their condition within Western academia, which was itself in the process of “multiculturalization.”
This “hegemonic postcolonial theory” was made by intellectual elites from postcolonial countries, educated in Western universities.
Even though they engaged with non-Western epistemological frameworks, they could not put these “other ways to know” into practice.
In the 2000s, concepts such as Bonaventura de Sousa Santos’s “ecologies of knowledges” began to signal a shift in approach.
De Sousa Santos and others suggested that each epistemology had its own wisdom to share, making evident the weaknesses of translation that uses just one specific epistemological frame.
Today, a new generation of thinkers are taking up the question of translation as a reliable space of negotiation.
Scholars such as Métis Zoe Todd and Anishinaabe Vanessa Watts have written on how non-Western epistemologies have been misappropriated or abstracted.
For example, Watts takes up Bruno Latour’s actor-network theory—which popularized the notion of the interconnection between humans and nonhumans—to argue that Latour nonetheless maintains a hierarchy of beings with humans at the top.
According to Watts, this misunderstands the Amerindian sense of nonhierarchical confluence between humans and the “natural”/nonhuman world.
José Carvalho calls this attempt to adopt or assimilate non-western cosmologies in an hegemonic frame the creation of an “epistemological counterpoint,” in which new concepts are only allowed to be part of the “score” as long as they follow a principal (Western) melody.
This critique of textual and conceptual translation is equally applicable when it comes to the visual arts and their modes of display.
Portrait of José Francisco Tún and collector Edith Recourat-Chorot, Esso Art Salon.
Date unknown, c. 1971.
3. Gestures of Subordination
Guatemalan writer Javier Payeras describes a photograph taken in the 1970s, in which painter Francisco Tún, one of the most prestigious indigenous artists of Guatemala, poses with two collectors of his work:
[T]he painter is motionless looking towards the ground, with his hands joined in a gesture of innocence, dressed in a suit and tie.
For some reason, this image reminded me of the vast documentation that exists of peasants portrayed, for a fleeting moment, alongside their bosses.
My assessment may be extreme, but it is necessary that the reader judge for himself.
What Payeras describes is the sense that indigenous art and artists are continually subordinated in the Western art circuit, even or especially when the work is included and attempted to be translated for Western audiences.
This subordination shows up not only in the framing and treatment of such work, but in many works of contemporary art themselves.
This is evident in two recent installations by Brazilian artists: Ernesto Neto’s 2017 work for the Venice Biennale work and Bené Fonteles’s 2016 work at the São Paulo Biennale.
After its exhibition, Neto’s Um Sagrado Lugar (Sacred Place, 2017) provoked strong criticism by a delegation of thirty-two emerging and established indigenous curators from Australia, New Zealand, Norway, and Canada.
For the work, Neto invited six Huni Kuin shamans, indigenous people originating in the Amazonian state of Acre, to participate in different activities and public talks inside an installation Neto built for the event.
The installation took the shape of a tent, which the artist described as “a place of sociality, political meetings and spiritual ceremonies of the Huni Kuin,” and which he further explained can bring a magic ontology that is absent in our sick Western society, allowing us to hear the voice of nature.
The Huni Kuins’ words, translated from Portuguese to English by Neto, speak to the urgency and responsibility we have toward the natural world.
In conversation, the Huni Kuin people spoke of Boa tea, or ayahuasca, the plant-derived psychedelic that they described as their DNA or God.
Neto presented these and other ideas as motifs in the installation, which took the shape of DNA helixes–seemingly attempting to bridge Western rationality and non-Western spirituality.
Neto had already worked with Huni Kuin people years before, asking them to guide private ayahuasca ceremonies for selected guests in art installations he had built.
According to indigenous curator Ryan Rice, Neto’s work—located in what the Biennale curators called the “Pavilion of Shamans”—was a colonialist, appropriative gesture lacking in any deep collaborative work with the Huni Kuin people, who, per Neto, would receive just 20 percent of the sale price if the work were sold.
During debates about the installation, curator Candice Hopkins expressed her concerns that the exhibition was reminiscent of nineteenth-century European universal exhibitions, which also put indigenous people on display.
She pointed out the importance of departing from a recognition of the agency of the invited indigenous groups, rather than reducing their presence purely to audience consumption.
The presence of the Huni Kuin in this contemporary art exhibition amounted to a fair example of Slavoj Žižek’s criticism of multiculturalism’s tenuous acceptance of the Other—an acceptance that only occurs when the Other provides a service or becomes an object of consumption, only when rendered a source of “benign Otherness.”
Similarly, Bené Fonteles’s work for the main pavilion of the 2016 São Paulo Biennale brought non-Western imagery into the museum.
For OcaTaperaTerreiro, he reproduced an oca, a type of Brazilian indigenous housing.
The word terreiro in the title refers to a space of celebration common in certain Afro-Brazilian groups.
Among other activities in the oca, Fonteles organized events with music and rituals to be observed by spectators.
In his description, Fonteles remarks that he was looking for a modernist representation of Brazilian nationality as a universal entity as enunciated by poet Mariox de Andrade in the 1920s.
The structure also housed Fonteles’s collection of indigenous and popular cultural artifacts, including photos of indigenous leaders, musicians, and important personalities from Brazilian intellectual history.
Thus, he gave the indigenous architectural frame the functions of a Western museum: classification, exhibition, and display.
He invited a great number of (male) intellectuals to share the space and speak or perform, some of them indigenous activists who denounced the Brazilian political sphere.
For Fonteles, the aim of these meetings was to celebrate the Brazilian national soul that, in his words, needed to be “healed.”
OcaTaperaTerreiro provides a good document of how Brazilian intellectuals deal with indigenous elements and defend nationalist discourses, given that the nation is one of the main accomplices of the (post)colonial project that homogenizes difference in the name of a national (mestizo) identity.
Both Fonteles and Neto share the goal of challenging Western categories of science and erudition by pointing out their supposed separation from popular and indigenous knowledges.
They implicate themselves, according to their own desires, in indigenous spirituality and cultural practices, referring to their works as potential tools for a process of healing Western society.
They think of their artworks as contexts for fostering public debates and supporting indigenous people politically.
But, both are in fact examples of how the intellectual classes of Brazil turn themselves into mediators of Otherness and translate the Other into a subordinate position: either using them as objects of consumption (Neto) or as an element in a national paradigm (Fonteles).
They position themselves as mediators of indigenous wisdom and healing, while maintaining power relations, evidenced by statements like: “Now we are within Neto’s art,” from an unidentified Huni Kuin participant in Venice.
These two cases are symptomatic of how the Western epistemological apparatus attempts to translate non-Western cosmologies without upending the hierarchies that make translation necessary in the first place.
I agree with the above critics that these artworks create spectacles out of non-Western cultural practices, and that there are dangers in bringing rituals into the art space.
Yet I am also concerned with how this criticism reflects the limitations of translation, as these limitations will always mislead us into interpreting these artworks as exercises of spectacularization or performance, corrupting the essence of the ceremonies.
In using translation as a tool to understand the unknown, what potentialities are we missing?
Even though I don’t agree with their ways of doing it, I agree with Neto and Fonteles that by locating “healing” ceremonies within Western museums and exhibition rooms, frictions are created between two approaches to understanding the world: the spiritual and the scientific.
The scientific approach has difficulties in dealing with what cannot be translated, while spiritualty is a great channel for the untranslatable.
To introduce a healing ritual into a museum is to suggest that something in the museum needs to be repaired, and that non-Western knowledge could be in charge of this process.
If spirituality has always been present in Western art, as evidenced by the term’s translation into indigenous languages, perhaps this spirituality could be repurposed toward transforming the institution itself.
4. Knowledge-Spiritualty
Since 2012, the revolutionary Brazilian project “The Meeting of Knowledges” has brought indigenous teachers, craft-makers, and Afro-Quilombo activists to teach in different Brazilian university contexts.
The project intends to challenge the Western scientific way of understanding Otherness as an “object of study” and instead invites the Other to join as interlocutor to create a pluri-epistemic University.
The group quickly reached the conclusion that for these guests it was not possible to separate spirituality from knowledge production.
The invited teachers, or sabedores (those who know), include spiritual practices in their lectures on medicine and curative plans, turning the classroom into a spiritual space.
“Spirituality is the base of knowledge,” and politics are initiated and rooted in the spiritual collective, as expressed in the First Indigenous Women Summit of Americas, held in 2002.
At the summit, speakers clarified that spiritualty is not confined to any particular religion or culture but allows a cosmic vision of life and provides a survival tool for indigenous people.
Following from the “Meeting of Knowledges,” one of the participating universities, the Federal University of Minas Gerais, introduced a series of courses led by spiritual leaders of African matrix religions in 2016.
But can—or should—spirituality be taught?
Is it possible for an institution such as a university to accept or acknowledge precisely what science has dismissed and disavowed?
How could this be made possible if this exclusion is not merely incidental but part of the very constitution of the sciences themselves?
What frictions emerge from the coexistence of different epistemological frameworks in the context of the university, the temple of Western universalism?
For one example, Kwakwaka’wakw geographer Sara Hunt describes how knowledge in the West is inherently connected to fixing and specifically contradicts worldviews based on becoming.
Unlike Western rationality, worldviews based on becoming posit a constant process of interlocution and inter-relation that cannot be apprehended:
The heterogeneity of indigenous voices and worldviews can easily become lost in efforts to understand Indigeneity in ways that fix Indigenous knowledge, suppressing its dynamic nature …
One starting place might be accepting the partiality of knowledge.
Its relational, alive, emergent nature means that as we come to know something, as we attempt to fix its meaning, we are always at risk of just missing something … In brief, we must be cautious that “Indigenous” does not come to signify engagement with “the other” without an actual shift in disciplinary ontologies and epistemologies.
If fixing and objectifying are our “ways of knowing” in the West, we need to create other ways to relate to non-Western knowledges and learn to liberate ourselves of the compulsion to fix.
Nonetheless, I am concerned with whether Western epistemology has the conditions to accept other epistemological frames, or in fact, to create joint methodologies to achieve what Hunt proposes, and how this would be possible.
How can one recover the potential for confrontation between two epistemologies without attempting to reconcile them?
Is this possible in the exhibition spaces of Western institutions?
Denise Ferreira da Silva defines three terms (derived from Hegel) that reveal how Western epistemology learns and knows the world: separability, determinacy, and sequentiality.
The first relates to defining things, considering them within a space and time of reference, through their specific qualities.
The second refers to the possibility of determining what something is by producing “formal constructs” as a consequence of the classification and evaluation of a thing’s qualities.
Finally, sequentiality relates to the evolution and self-development of Spirit in history, dependent upon its teleological destiny through repetition.
Anishnaabe scholar Vanessa Watts explains it as such: “The epistemological-ontological removes the how and why from the what.
The what is left empty, ready for inscription.
[…] These distinctive domains provide evidence that humans are assumed to be separate from the world they live in, in order to have a perception of it.”
So, Western epistemological frames construct definitions or delimit meanings to try to translate epistemologies with inherently process-based ways of thinking.
Can Western methods of fixing and determining that in turn isolate the what from the how be compatible with non-Western relationality based on processes and connections between the what, when, where, and why?
5.
Confessional Ontology
In a video by the Kaqchikel artist Fernando Poyón, Contra la Pared (Against the wall, 2006), a group of indigenous women are lined up as soldiers in formation and beat their chests.
One can read their lips as they repeat the well-known mantra: “It’s my fault, it’s my fault, it’s my most grievous fault.”
While watching stifling close-up shots of their faces, we hear ecclesiastic music instead of their voices.
The title “Against the wall” refers to the state of being immobilized by religious colonization and patriarchy, without any possibility to act.
Like science, religion was a historical tool of control in Western society, and one of its main technologies was the imperative to confess one’s sins.
Liberation is promised only when the sinners profess their own guilt.
In his writing, Glissant analyzed the link between knowledge, possession, and control, observing that the etymology of the word comprendre (to understand) derives from prendre, meaning to grab hold of or to grasp something.
The ongoing Western colonial desire for transparency, despite the impossibilities of clarification, is what I term a confessional ontology, where to know also involves a certain ownership of things, nature, and other humans—the Western fantasy for control.
In this ontology, extracting secrets is an important part of maintaining power—and spirituality contains many secrets.
However, to decode spirituality is to undermine its potential and—worse still—to risk destroying that potential once and for all.
In response to this drive toward knowledge as possession, Glissant posed the right to opacity, arguing that only by insisting on the importance of opacity can we vindicate that which we cannot understand grasp (comprendre).
One of the questions that arises is how to communicate with that which should remain unknown.
In 2006, De Sousa Santos wrote: “I am looking for an appropriate epistemology to understand the World Social Forum, an alternative globalization, knowledges that come together, and I am not just thinking of translation between cultures but also, for example, between sciences and poetry.”
And poetry, in fact, is one of the few places where opacity is validated in Western culture.
Antonio Pichilla, Envoltorio (Wrapper), 2007.
Courtesy of the artist.
Tz’utujil artist Antonio Pichilla’s 2007 sculpture Envoltorio (Wrapper) is an unknown object wrapped in red fabric.
In Mayan cultures, there is a tradition of wrapping things for various purposes.
Food, personal belongings, and objects with special spiritual energy such as bones, the objects of ancestors, or stones, might be wrapped in textiles that serve as protectors of the object’s magical energy.
Each community has its own traditional textiles of different colors, and knowledge about them is ancestrally passed through generations.
The textiles operate as the connectors between two worlds: the magic/spiritual/unknown and the material human realms.
Wrapping is an act of secrecy, and this privacy and opacity carries a sacred sense.
Wrappers pose a dilemma for a Western researcher.
On the one hand, respecting the opacity of another culture requires admitting the limitations of Western epistemology in dealing with the untranslatable and the unknown.
On the other hand, in order to heal the violence wrought by exactly these epistemologies, it is important to name and acknowledge the colonial wound.
For many indigenous Mayan artists, art-making is part of a process of healing colonial memories communally.
Given the importance of healing, could the wounds and the traumas remain unnamed in the confessional terms of Western psychoanalysis, but named in different, opaque ways?
Could we overcome the Western imperative to name, fix, reduce?
Or it is necessary to name trauma and violence to heal and repair?
Without naming, what would reparation look like?
Edgar Calel & Rosario Sotelo, Abuelos (Grandparents), 2014.
Courtesy of the artists.
6.
Winaq
Between 2013 and 2014, Kaqchikel artist Edgar Calel and U.S. artist Rosario Sotelo presented the artwork Abuelos (Grandparents) in an art space in Comalapa, Guatemala—Calel’s hometown.
After the exhibition opened, Calel organized a ceremony in which their installation turned into an altar for their ancestors and other members of the indigenous community.
Fruit was laid upon stones—a common practice with pre-Hispanic roots in Mayan ceremonies—to symbolize the presence of their ancestors.
For the Maya, ceremonies are one of the most important moments of interchange, during which the process of personification and communication takes place.
The sense of time contained in past, present, and future temporalities is personified through the figure of the grandparent—spiritual references and the analogy between grandparents and saints are recurring, for example.
The artists used the exhibition space as a sacred site for celebration; it was not a large public spectacle, and only a few regular practitioners and neighbors were involved.
In Mayan cosmologies, humans are not necessarily given the status of person, and personhood—achieved through a relational process—carries a superior status to humanity.
Persons are recognized as such through a process of interlocution.
In Mayan languages, winaq means “person” or “complete being,” and the term has no gender.
In their 2011 book Winaq: Fundamentos del pensamiento maya, Mayan translators Ajb’ee Jiménez and Héctor Aj Xol Ch’ok write that winaq “refers to processes of giving and acquiring life in parallel, of transforming into life or transforming life, of making life and forming collectivity.”
The authors call this process winaquisation.
When Pichilla wraps a stone with traditional textiles in his work Granfather (2015), for example, he performs the process of personification or winaquisation that takes place in ceremonies during which interaction with stones connects people with their ancestors.
Before they were displayed as artworks, the stones were used in private ceremonies in sacred places.
Placed into a different context, they impart the energy of that private place into the public art sphere.
Edgar Calel, B’atz constelación de conocimientos (B’atz constellation of knowledges), 2015.
Courtesy of the artist.
In his photograph B’atz Constellation of Knowledges (2015), Calel stands in the middle of a corn plantation and stares at the viewer.
He is wearing a jumper on which he has embroidered the names of the 22 Mayan languages.
On one hand, these names speak to the knowledges of Mayan peoples; each language serves as the expression of a certain culture and cosmology.
The process of planting and harvesting corn marks the seasons; the activity has a sacred quality in Mayan communities and is one of the fundamental sources of knowledge and cosmovision.
In ancient Mayan iconography, a common image shows humans turning into corn and vice versa.
The expression Hal Winaq means the exchangeability of the corn and the human.
The Mayan word for “mother corn,” Qtxu’ Axi’n, expresses the renewal of life.
Thus, it’s evident that the personification of nonhuman beings is key for the decentralization of the human, and the possibility of being able to “feel among equals” with all other beings.
We can see in Calel’s artwork the importance of the “place-thought” described by Vanesa Watts, “based upon the premise that the land is alive and thinking, and humans and non-human agency comes from the extensions of the land.”
What is crucial for Calel’s B’atz constellation of knowledges is the fact that he directly confronts the viewer with his gaze.
Unlike the photograph by Francisco Tún referenced above, by turning his own gaze to the viewer, Calel asserts his personhood and status as an artist.
His presence addresses what collectors do not want to see when they buy indigenous art or artifacts: the indigenous person who created them.
Decolonial theorists have pointed to the potential embedded in the confrontation, linguistic and visual, to overcome Western colonial exploitation—to overcome being made an object of study.
Following from this thinking, one can question whether it is possible to separate Western approaches to Amerindian thinking from Amerindian thinking itself.
In other words, for instance, can we consider Mayan cosmology as a philosophy in its own right rather than mediating or translating it to fit into Western philosophy?
To find out, we must interrogate how Western academies function as mediators when translating other schools of thought into poststructuralist frames.
In their translations of art referenced throughout this text—as “knowledge-wisdom-understanding” or a sacred sense of feeling and respect—it becomes evident that different cultures locate their experience of spirituality within the artwork itself.
The works are not necessarily spiritual, but operate from a spiritual place.
In discussing the terms, I have used my own frame of knowledge to offer an interpretation of the untranslatable elements of other epistemologies.
The fact that we can only use our own frames of knowledge is the same predicament that the indigenous artists discussed here expose in the exhibition space, mediated by poetry (one of the few Western tools in which opacity is considered legitimate), making evident the limitations of our epistemological tools and the aporias of theory.
My words and interpretations of the experience of spirituality will never be able to translate experience itself, and will always risk suffocating it.
Translation is a faulty tool for subordinating epistemological frames, but can there be any coexistence without an attempt at translation?
Does any language have the resources to communicate without translating?
Is translation—the need to transfer knowledge from one framework to another—really necessary?
Might communication, affection, and healing be possible in other ways, without fixation, nominalism, or transparency?
As Glissant claims, we can instead learn ways of coexistence that accept the untranslatable, the uncertain, and the unknowable.
We can learn ways of interlocution that maintain two or more different epistemological frameworks in the same conversation, learning from each other.
As Marisol de la Cadena and Mario Blaser show, a cultural frame creates the conditions for the thinkable and the unthinkable—thus, a fundamental question in inventing political resistance must be to widen the space of the unthinkable.
In de la Cadena’s view, this interlocution with the frameworks of spirituality-place-thought could be a starting point for “the political” beyond current modern macropolitical models.
And, from that place where neither knowledge is subordinated in any epistemological counterpoint, perhaps we can re-invent new hybridities, contaminations, influences, mutual inspirations, appropriations, and impurities.
Vitamin B12 is found in a lot of animal products such as meat, eggs and dairy.
A deficiency can lead to a type of anaemia as well as more severe complications such as heart problems, temporary infertility and problems with the nervous system.
Common symptoms of the deficiency include fatigue and muscle weakness.
How to live longer: Golden drink lowering cholesterol and blood sugar
However, symptoms can also appear on the tongue.
According to WebMD people with B12 deficiency could discover they have ulcers on their tongue.
It says: “You may get these ulcers on your gums or tongue.
“The sores usually clear up on their own, but it helps to avoid ingredients that might be irritating or painful, like vinegar, citrus, and hot spices like chilli powder.
READ MORE: Cancer symptoms: The 'sudden' sign you may start to notice when waking up in the morning
Symptoms of the novel coronavirus can mimic the flu or even a common cold.
COVID-19 symptoms range from mild to severe, and some infected people show no symptoms, meaning they're asymptomatic.
Although there are a wide spectrum of symptoms, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has listed the 11 most common COVID-19 symptoms that appear two to 14 days after exposure to the coronavirus :
Fever or chills
Cough
Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
Fatigue
Muscle or body aches
Headache
New loss of taste or smell
Sore throat
Congestion or runny nose
Nausea or vomiting
Diarrhea
And according to the U.K. National Health Service, loss of appetite and feeling sick or being sick are also symptoms of COVID-19
Emergency COVID-19 symptoms
The following symptoms are emergency warning signs that you should seek immediate medical attention, according to the CDC:
Trouble breathing
Persistent pain or pressure in the chest
New confusion
Inability to wake or stay awake
Bluish lips or face
Other severe symptoms that concern you
Less common COVID-19 symptoms
There are other, less common symptoms that have been reported in COVID-19 patients.
For example, various skin rashes have been linked to COVID-19.
"The rashes can take many forms — some appear as tiny red spots, while others appear as larger flat or raised lesions.
Some have a hive-like appearance, while others look like frostbitten toes," with the latter dubbed "COVID toes," Live Science previously reported .
It's not clear whether these rashes are directly caused by the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, or related to other factors, such as a charged-up immune system in those infected with the virus , or lifestyle factors associated with the stay-at-home orders that were in place around the time the first cases of COVID toes were reported.
Several studies found that COVID toes occurred even in cases where patients tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 , raising questions about the underlying cause of the condition.
That said, a more recent study, published Oct. 5, 2021 in the British Journal of Dermatology , hinted that COVID toes might be partially driven by proteins called type 1 interferons, which switch on pathogen-fighting genes in immune cells, and autoantibodies, which inadvertently attack the body's own tissues, Live Science previously reported .
COVID-19 can also cause neurological symptoms.
In addition to the loss of smell and taste, the virus can cause muscle weakness, tingling or numbness in the hands and feet, dizziness, confusion, delirium, seizures and stroke, according to Harvard Medical School .
How COVID-19 symptoms progress
A person with COVID-19 may have mild symptoms for about a week before rapidly worsening, according to Harvard Medical School.
"Let your doctor know if your symptoms quickly worsen over a short period of time," the Harvard website notes.
In more serious cases of COVID-19, patients can experience pneumonia, which means their lungs begin to fill with pockets of pus or fluid.
This leads to intense shortness of breath and painful coughing.
In some people, the virus can also cause severe disease indirectly by triggering a "cytokine storm" or an overreaction of the immune system that can cause severe damage in the body, according to Harvard.
The CDC recommends that people with COVID-19 or any respiratory illness monitor their symptoms carefully.
Worsening shortness of breath is a reason to seek medical care, particularly for older individuals or people with underlying health conditions, the agency notes.
COVID-19 symptoms in children
The risk of severe disease "increases steadily" with age, but younger people can also become severely ill when infected with SARS-CoV-2, according to Harvard Medical School.
Most children with COVID-19 have either mild symptoms or no symptoms, but some can become seriously sick, according to the CDC .
Babies under the age of 1 year old and children with certain underlying conditions such as asthma or chronic lung diseases, diabetes , heart disease and obesity may be at an increased risk of severe illness, according to the CDC.
A potentially serious but uncommon condition tied to COVID-19 in children is known as multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C).
In children, the most common symptoms of COVID-19 are fever and cough but they may also develop chills, nasal congestion or runny nose, loss of taste or smell, sore throat, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, diarrhea, nausea or vomiting, stomach, tiredness, headache, muscle or body aches, poor appetite or poor feeding, especially in infants, according to the CDC.
Parents should "pay particular attention" to markers that can indicate COVID-19 in the child such as a fever of 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius) or higher, sore throat, a new uncontrolled cough that causes difficulty breathing, diarrhea, vomiting or stomach ache and a new onset of severe headache, especially if it's along with a fever, according to the CDC.
If the child is showing any emergency signs (same as the ones listed for adults), the CDC recommends seeking medical care immediately.
What is MISC in kids?
A multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) has also been associated with the novel coronavirus, according to the CDC .
This syndrome is a condition in which parts of the body such as the heart , lungs , kidneys , brain , skin, eyes or gastrointestinal organs become inflamed.
It's not yet clear what causes MIS-C, but children diagnosed with the condition often had COVID-19 or had been around someone who had COVID-19, according to the CDC.
Several cases of MIS have also been reported in adults, and in these instances, the condition is known as MIS-A, Live Science previously reported .
The inflammatory syndrome was first described in April 2020 in the United Kingdom, when doctors began to notice an increasing number of kids coming in with severe symptoms that seemed to resemble Kawasaki disease, a rare childhood disease that causes inflammation of blood vessels and can lead to heart damage.
Some of the symptoms also overlapped with those of toxic shock syndrome, a life-threatening illness caused by toxins released by certain bacteria .
There have since been thousands of cases reported in the U.S. and worldwide, according to the CDC.
According to the CDC, symptoms of MIS-C include an ongoing fever plus two or more of the following symptoms:
Stomach pain
Bloodshot eyes
Diarrhea
Dizziness or lightheadedness (signs of low blood pressure)
Skin rash
Vomiting
These are not mild symptoms, so parents will likely notice them, The New York Times reported .
For instance, the abdominal pain is not just a little bellyache but "severe enough for the parent to be worried," Dr. George Ofori-Amanfo, division chief of pediatric critical care medicine at Mount Sinai Kravis Children's Hospital in New York, told the Times.
And the rashes, the Times reported, tend to be red, cover a large area, and usually appear on the hands, forearms and chest, turning white when you press on them, according to the Times.
If your child has a persistent fever above 101 degrees Fahrenheit (38.3 degrees Celsius), call your pediatrician.
Treatment includes supportive care to reduce symptoms, including steroids for inflammation, fever reducers and other medications, the Times reported.
Children may also be treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), a cocktail of various antibodies that serves as an anti-inflammatory treatment, Live Science reported .
As of March 1, 2022, there have been 7,459 reported cases of MIS-C across the U.S. and 63 associated deaths, according to the CDC .
Symptoms of omicron and other variants
The omicron variant of SARS-CoV-2 emerged in late 2021 and rapidly spread across the world, outcompeting the previous delta variant.
Studies suggest that omicron is less adept at invading lung cells than other versions of the virus, Live Science previously reported.
This fact, combined with the widespread availability of vaccination, means that infections with omicron tend to be less severe, on average, than delta infections.
The symptoms of omicron are similar to those of previous variants, according to the CDC .
Because of the virus' tendency to invade the upper respiratory tract, symptoms may feel like a cold or sinus infection.
Because the virus replicates much more quickly in the bronchi, or respiratory passages that carry air from your windpipe to your lungs, than delta, according to a paper posted to the preprint database bioRxiv on Jan. 3, 2022, symptom onset may be more rapid after exposure.
In general, the public health advice has not changed: COVID-19 can present as a mild head cold all the way up to a serious respiratory infection, and any respiratory symptom signals the need for a test.
Breakthrough COVID-19 symptoms
COVID-19 vaccines protect against infection with SARS-CoV-2, but they aren't 100% effective.
As such, fully vaccinated people may still catch COVID-19, which is known as a breakthrough infection.
But fully vaccinated people are much less likely to develop serious illness from COVID-19 compared with those who are unvaccinated, according to the CDC .
In particular, the omicron variant evades antibodies from vaccination and infection with previous variants, leading to an increased rate of breakthrough infections compared with previous variants.
A third dose of an mRNA vaccine reduces the risk of a symptomatic infection, according to a March 2022 study in the New England Journal of Medicine ; the mRNA vaccines include those produced by Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech.
The booster dose also provided 90% protection against hospitalization with omicron, according to a January CDC report , and reduced the risk of emergency room and urgent care visits 95% and 82%, respectively.
Omicron breakthrough cases are typically reminiscent of a cold or flu, according to MD Anderson Cancer Center Chief Infection Control Officer Dr. Roy Chemaly .
Cough, runny nose, congestion, fatigue, sore throat, and headache are common.
According to a Kaiser Family Foundation analysis of hospitalizations during the time period when the more-severe delta variant predominated, 69% of breakthrough hospitalizations were in people 65 and older, and 21% were in people 50 to 64.
Only 10% were in younger patients.
(In unvaccinated individuals, by contrast, 29% of hospitalizations were in those over 65, 30% were in 50 to 64-year-olds, and 41% were in those younger than 50.)
These findings indicate that vaccines are protective, but that breakthrough infections can be more serious in older and immunocompromised people.
Additional resources
The CDC maintains a clearinghouse of coronavirus information and public health recommendations at its COVID-19 page .
The United Kingdom's ZOE COVID Symptom Study provides information on COVID-19 infection rates and symptoms, provided by volunteers who opt in to report their experiences with the disease.
The Mayo Clinic has more information on COVID-19 symptoms, including a self-check tool to help decide if you need to take a coronavirus test.
You can also check out The American Academy of Dermatology Association for more information on skin conditions that could be caused by COVID-19.
U.S. residents can order a limited number of free at-home coronavirus tests at covidtests.gov .
Editor's note: This article was updated on March 15, 2022 to include updated information on common COVID-19 symptoms as well as those related to different types of infections.
Bibliography
Andrews, N., et al. (2022, March 2).
Covid-19 Vaccine Effectiveness against the Omicron (B.1.1.529) Variant.
The New England Journal of Medicine.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2119451
Demarco, C. (2021, December 29).
COVID-19 breakthrough infections and the omicron variant: What to know now.
MD Anderson Cancer Center.
https://www.mdanderson.org/cancerwise/covid-19-breakthrough-infections-and-the-omicron-variant--what-t.h00-159466368.html
Harvard Medical School.
(2022, January 26).
COVID-19 basics.
Harvard Health Publishing.
https://www.health.harvard.edu/diseases-and-conditions/covid-19-basics
Hernandez, C., Bruckner, A. (2020).
Focus on "COVID Toes."
JAMA Dermatology, 156(9):1003.
doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2020.2062
Moyer, M.W. (2020, July 13).
What We Know About the Covid-Related Syndrome Affecting Children.
The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/19/parenting/pmis-coronavirus-children.html
Peacock, T.P., et al. (2022, January 3).
The SARS-CoV-2 variant, Omicron, shows rapid replication in human primary nasal epithelial cultures and efficiently uses the endosomal route of entry.
bioRxiv.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.12.31.474653
Thompson, M.G., et al. (2022, January 28).
Effectiveness of a Third Dose of mRNA Vaccines Against COVID-19–Associated Emergency Department and Urgent Care Encounters and Hospitalizations Among Adults During Periods of Delta and Omicron Variant Predominance — VISION Network, 10 States, August 2021–January 2022.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 71(4);139–145.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7104e3
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
(2021, August 2).
Families & Children.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/groups/families-children.html
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
(2022, March 1).
Health Department-Reported Cases of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) in the United States.
https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker/#mis-national-surveillance
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
(n.d.).
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome (MIS).
Retrieved March 12, 2022, from https://www.cdc.gov/mis/index.html
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
(2021, February 22).
Symptoms of COVID-19.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/symptoms.html
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
(2021, December 17).
The Possibility of COVID-19 after Vaccination: Breakthrough Infections.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/effectiveness/why-measure-effectiveness/breakthrough-cases.html
Originally published on Live Science.
Since Renee Larsen contracted COVID-19 in March of 2020, she has suffered one medical ailment after another.
"I had a stroke," Larsen told CBS News.
"I've had blood clots in both legs.
I've had paralysis in my right arm three times.
"
She says debilitating fatigue upended her 22-year career in human resources.
"When the chronic fatigue hit, my world changed because I could not function," she said.
Unable to work, she lost her job.
Unable to pay her bills, she lost her home and is now living with a friend.
She spends her days seeing one doctor after another.
"Everyone has a different take," Larsen said.
"Every doctor, I have 23 doctors.
Before this, I only had asthma.
So this has changed my life.
"
There is no universal clinical definition for long COVID, but there are more than 200 symptoms associated with it.
Nearly one in five COVID-19 patients will experience long-haul symptoms that can last months or even years, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
"Some of the more common symptoms that I'm seeing are brain fog, fatigue, depression, shortness of breath," Dr. Ted Long, senior vice president of ambulatory care at NYC Health + Hospitals, told CBS News.
"But there are some of my patients that have symptoms that are less common, things like hair loss.
"
Larsen is also fighting to get insurance benefits.
She says she's been denied disability both from her employer and Social Security.
Attorney Joshua Ben said his COVID-19 clients are often met with skepticism.
"A lot of people have a lot of different symptoms, but they're not showing up on the testing," Ben told CBS News.
"And Social Security is looking for objective testing.
So it's really difficult.
"
Larsen said she feels forgotten.
"We're left behind," she said.
"I think that we're the forgotten people of COVID right now.
We're survivors, and we're telling our story of how we're still here."
For more than a year now, scientists have been racing to understand how the mysterious new virus that causes COVID-19 damages not only our bodies, but also our brains.
Early in the pandemic, some infected people noticed a curious symptom: the loss of smell.
Reports of other brain-related symptoms followed: headaches, confusion, hallucinations and delirium.
Some infections were accompanied by depression, anxiety and sleep problems.
Recent studies suggest that leaky blood vessels and inflammation are somehow involved in these symptoms.
But many basic questions remain unanswered about the virus, which has infected more than 145 million people worldwide.
Researchers are still trying to figure out how many people experience these psychiatric or neurological problems, who is most at risk, and how long such symptoms might last.
And details remain unclear about how the pandemic-causing virus, called SARS-CoV-2, exerts its effects.
“We still haven’t established what this virus does in the brain,” says Elyse Singer, a neurologist at the University of California, Los Angeles.
There are probably many answers, she says.
“It’s going to take us years to tease this apart.”
Getting the numbers
For now, some scientists are focusing on the basics, including how many people experience these sorts of brain-related problems after COVID-19.
A recent study of electronic health records reported an alarming answer: In the six months after an infection, one in three people had experienced a psychiatric or neurological diagnosis.
That result, published April 6 in Lancet Psychiatry, came from the health records of more than 236,000 COVID-19 survivors.
Researchers counted diagnoses of 14 disorders, ranging from mental illnesses such as anxiety or depression to neurological events such as strokes or brain bleeds, in the six months after COVID-19 infection.
“We didn’t expect it to be such a high number,” says study coauthor Maxime Taquet of the University of Oxford in England.
One in three “might sound scary,” he says.
But it’s not clear whether the virus itself causes these disorders directly.
The vast majority of those diagnoses were depression and anxiety, “disorders that are extremely common in the general population already,” points out Jonathan Rogers, a psychiatrist at University College London.
What’s more, depression and anxiety are on the rise among everyone during the pandemic, not just people infected with the virus.
Mental health disorders are “extremely important things to address,” says Allison Navis, a neurologist at the post-COVID clinic at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York City.
“But they’re very different than a stroke or dementia,” she says.
About 1 in 50 people with COVID-19 had a stroke, Taquet and colleagues found.
Among people with severe infections that came with delirium or other altered mental states, though, the incidence was much higher — 1 in 11 had strokes.
Serious neurological damage, such as these strokes caused by blocked blood vessels, turn up in people with COVID-19.
K. Thakur et al/Brain 2021
Taquet’s study comes with caveats.
It was a look back at diagnosis codes, often entered by hurried clinicians.
Those aren’t always reliable.
And the study finds a relationship, but can’t conclude that COVID-19 caused any of the diagnoses.
Still, the results hint at how COVID-19 affects the brain.
Blood vessels scrutinized
Early on in the pandemic, the loss of smell suggested that the virus might be able to attack nerve cells directly.
Perhaps SARS-CoV-2 could breach the skull by climbing along the olfactory nerve, which carries smells from the nose directly to the brain, some researchers thought.
That frightening scenario doesn’t seem to happen much.
Most studies so far have failed to turn up much virus in the brain, if any, says Avindra Nath, a neurologist who studies central nervous system infections at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.
Nath and his colleagues expected to see signs of the virus in brains of people with COVID-19 but didn’t find it.
“I kept telling our folks, ‘Let’s go look again,’” Nath says.
That absence suggests that the virus is affecting the brain in other ways, possibly involving blood vessels.
So Nath and his team scanned blood vessels in post-mortem brains of people who had been infected with the virus with an MRI machine so powerful that it’s not approved for clinical use in living people.
“We were able to look at the blood vessels in a way that nobody could,” he says.
Damage abounded, the team reported February 4 in the New England Journal of Medicine.
Small clots sat in blood vessels.
The walls of some vessels were unusually thick and inflamed.
And blood was leaking out of the vessels into the surrounding brain tissue.
“You can see all three things happening at the same time,” Nath says.
Those results suggest that clots, inflamed linings and leaks in the barriers that normally keep blood and other harmful substances out of the brain may all contribute to COVID-related brain damage.
Signs of damage in the brains of people with COVID-19 involve inflammation, including these immune cells around a blood vessel (left), and changes in cells (right) that might have resulted from low oxygen.
J. Lou et al/Free Neuropathology 2021
But several unknowns prevent any definite conclusions about how these damaged blood vessels relate to people’s symptoms or outcomes.
There’s not much clinical information available about the people in Nath’s study.
Some likely died from causes other than COVID-19, and no one knows how the virus would have affected them had they not died.
Inflamed body and brain
Inflammation in the body can cause trouble in the brain, too, says Maura Boldrini, a psychiatrist at Columbia University in New York.
Inflammatory signals released after injury can change the way the brain makes and uses chemical signaling molecules, called neurotransmitters, that help nerve cells communicate.
Key communication molecules such as serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine can get scrambled when there’s lots of inflammation.
Neural messages can get interrupted in people who suffer traumatic brain injuries, for example; researchers have found a relationship between inflammation and mental illness in football players and others who experienced hits to the head.
Similar evidence comes from people with depression, says Emily Troyer, a psychiatrist at the University of California, San Diego.
Some people with depression have high levels of inflammation, studies have found.
“We don’t actually know that that’s going on in COVID,” she cautions.
“We just know that COVID causes inflammation, and inflammation has the potential to disrupt neurotransmission, particularly in the case of depression.”
Among the cells that release inflammatory proteins in the brain are microglia, the brain’s version of the body’s disease-fighting immune system.
Microglia may also be involved in the brain’s response to COVID-19.
Microglia primed for action were found in about 43 percent of 184 COVID-19 patients, Singer and others reported in a review published February 4 in Free Neuropathology.
Similar results come from a series of autopsies of COVID-19 patients’ brains; 34 of 41 brains contained activated microglia, researchers from Columbia University Irving Medical Center and New York Presbyterian Hospital reported April 15 in Brain.
With these findings, it’s not clear that SARS-CoV-2 affects people’s brains differently from other viruses, says Navis.
In her post–COVID-19 clinic at Mount Sinai, she sees patients with fatigue, headaches, numbness and dizziness — symptoms that are known to follow other viral infections, too.
“I’m hesitant to say this is unique to COVID,” Navis says.
“We’re just not used to seeing so many people getting one specific infection, or knowing what the viral infection is.”
Teasing apart all the ways the brain can suffer amid this pandemic, and how that affects any given person, is impossible.
Depression and anxiety are on the rise, surveys suggest.
That rise might be especially sharp in people who endured stressful diagnoses, illnesses and isolation.
In a postmortem brain from a person with COVID-19, a clotting protein called fibrinogen (red) indicates that the blood vessels are damaged and leaky.
Avindra Nath
Just being in an intensive care unit can lead to confusion.
Delirium affected 606 of 821 people — 74 percent — while patients were in intensive care units for respiratory failure and other serious emergencies, a 2013 study found.
Post-traumatic stress disorder afflicted about a third of people who had been seriously sick with COVID-19 (SN: 3/12/21).
More specific aspects of treatment matter too.
COVID-19 patients who spent long periods of time on their stomachs might have lingering nerve pain, not because the virus attacked the nerve, but because the prone position compressed the nerves.
And people might feel mentally fuzzy, not because of the virus itself, but because a shortage of the anesthetic drug, propofol, meant they received an alternative sedative that can bring more aftereffects, says Rogers, the psychiatrist at University College London.
Lingering questions — what the virus actually does to the brain, who will suffer the most, and for how long — are still unanswered, and probably won’t be for a long time.
The varied and damaging effects of lockdowns, the imprecision doctors and patients use for describing symptoms (such as the nonmedical term “brain fog”) and the indirect effects the virus can have on the brain all merge, creating a devilishly complex puzzle.
For now, doctors are busy focusing on ways in which they can help, even amid these mysteries, and designing larger, longer studies to better understand the effects of the virus on the brain.
That information will be key to helping people move forward.
“This isn’t going to be over soon, unfortunately,” Troyer says.
Tucker Carlson's abrupt departure from Fox News today is being hailed by many as a positive development that will improve our political discourse.
But I fear it won't make nearly as much difference as some hope.
I certainly will not miss Carlson.
I was on his show in 2017 (video linked here) to talk about immigration and public ignorance.
He was a jerk to me on the air; in fairness, I knew he was likely going to be that way, so can't say I was tricked into appearing.
Afterwards some of his more rabid fans sent me death threats.
One of them was Cesar Sayoc, who later became famous as the "pipe bomber."
I don't blame Carlson for the death threats.
I do blame him for his constant promotion of lies, malice, and xenophobia.
At the same time, I think it's at best premature to conclude that Carlson's departure will significantly improve the right-wing media scene.
Tucker Carlson didn't become popular by persuading his audience to change their minds.
He did it by telling them what they wanted to hear.
Whoever replaces him is likely to do the same.
Admittedly, in the wake of the Dominion case in which Fox was forced to pay $787.5 million to settle a lawsuit arising from its mendacious coverage of the 2020 election, the network may be more cautious about airing material that verges on defamation.
But most political lies and misinformation aren't clear and egregious enough to meet the appropriately high legal standard for a successful defamation lawsuit targeting political speech about a public figures (ironically, Donald Trump and some other right-wingers have been trying to get that standard lowered).
The Dominion lawsuit revealed that audience preferences drives Fox's decisions much more than the reverse.
Ultimately, the supply of political misinformation is far less of a problem than the demand for it.
Regardless of what happens to Carlson, that problem is likely to persist—and not just on the political right.
Healthcare providers (HCP) at three Miami hospitals during the height of the Covid crisis, who practiced the Transcendental Meditation technique (TM), showed a rapid and highly significant reduction in stress-related burnout symptoms such as somatization, depression, anxiety, sleep disturbances, and emotional exhaustion, as well as significant improvement in mental well-being, compared to a parallel matched lifestyle-as-usual group (LAU), according to a new study published today in PLOS ONE.
A total of 65 healthcare providers at the three Miami hospitals (Baptist, Mercy, and Encompass Hospitals), were enrolled in the TM group, as well as 65 parallel match controls.
Validated surveys were used to assess burnout and stress-related symptoms including the Brief Symptom Inventory-18 scale (BSI), the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI), the Maslach Burnout Inventory-Human Services Survey (MBI), and
the Warwick Edinburgh Mental Well Being Scale (WEMWBS).
After two weeks symptoms of somatization, depression, and anxiety in the TM group showed a near 45% reduction and insomnia, emotional exhaustion and well-being had improved by 33%, 16% and 11% respectively.
At three months, the TM group showed mean reductions in anxiety of 62%, somatization 58%, depression 50%, insomnia 44%, emotional exhaustion 40%, and improvement in mental well-being of 18% (Examples Figures 1 – 3).
TM appeared easy to learn and was maintained by the subjects within an average weekly TM session completion rate of 83%.
The results of this study-;one of the largest on the effects of TM in a healthcare setting conducted during the height of the Covid crisis-;are dramatic, not just because of the size and significance of the improvements in a variety of burnout indices, but notably in how rapidly the results were seen."
Mark S. Nestor, M.D. Ph.D., principal investigator, and lead author of the study
Dr. Nestor is Director of the Center for Clinical and Cosmetic Research in Aventura Florida, and Voluntary Professor at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine.
"This rapid and dramatic improvement in stress-related symptoms is not often seen with the use of medications much less with other easy to learn mental techniques.
"
The authors point out that "the study confirms and expands on the previously reported benefits of the practice of TM and its positive psychological impact on healthcare providers in high stress settings and should be considered as a rapid intervention for healthcare worker burnout but certainly may have application to other at-risk populations."
There is some evidence to support the use of cannabis for symptom management in children with cancer, but there is a lack of evidence on the safety and efficacy of cannabinoids in this patient population, according to researchers.
“There is a strong need for interventional studies comparing the safety and efficacy of cannabinoids and available treatment options in children with cancer,” the researchers wrote in Cancer.
The researchers conducted a systematic review of trials with at least 1 child (18 or younger) who had cancer and was receiving any type of natural or pharmaceutical-grade cannabis for symptom management.
The analysis included 19 studies — 10 observational studies (n=1529) and 9 interventional studies (n=398).
The median age of participants ranged from 6 months to 18 years in the observational studies and from 3.6 months to 18 years in the interventional studies.
Most patients in the observational studies (90%) had brain tumors, leukemia, or lymphoma.
Cancer types were not specified in most of the interventional studies.
In 11 of the 19 studies (58%), cannabinoids were used for the management of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV).
The cannabinoids used included nabilone (26%), unspecified cannabis herbal extracts (26%), Δ‐9‐tetrahydrocannabinol (THC; 16%), dronabinol (11%), Δ‐8‐THC (5%), levonantradol (5%), unspecified cannabinoids (5%), and cannabidiol (CBD; 5%).
There were 7 interventional studies that reported efficacy outcomes, and cannabinoids were reportedly superior to active control groups for controlling CINV.
Patients also received cannabinoids for the management of cancer symptoms other than CINV (42%, 8 of 19 studies), but efficacy data were not provided for these studies.
The major cannabinoid‐related adverse events (AEs) reported in the observational studies were drowsiness, dizziness, headache, and euphoria. Cannabinoid‐related
AEs reported in the interventional studies were somnolence, increased appetite, the development of a “high,” dizziness, and dry mouth.
“Evidence is urgently required on the safety of cannabinoids with respect to different cannabis products, tolerability, and doses of cannabinoids in the vulnerable pediatric population diagnosed with cancer,” the researchers wrote.
“[T]here is scope for developing a core set of outcomes for cannabinoid clinical trials in pediatric oncology.
Additionally, there is scope for pediatricians to collaborate internationally to generate long‐term safety and efficacy data for cannabinoids in children with cancer.”
Disclosures: Some study authors disclosed funding to research medicinal cannabis from various entities.
Please see the original reference for a full list of disclosures.
Reference
Chhabra M, Ben-Eltriki M, Paul A, et al.
Cannabinoids for symptom management in children with cancer: A systematic review and meta‐analysis.
Cancer.
Published online August 28, 2023.
doi:10.1002/cncr.34920
Heatstroke can kill or cause damage to the brain and other internal organs.
Although heat stroke mainly affects people over age 50, it also takes a toll on healthy young individuals too.
Experiencing a lack of sweat known as anhidrosis could be a symptom you’re experiencing heatstroke and should not be ignored.
READ MORE:
Type 2 diabetes: The test that could identify high blood sugar
Patients can be concerned about “bothering their doctor”, but there is usually a simple solution and there is no sense in ignoring symptoms which might turn out to be something sinister.
Fortunately, often things progress slowly.
Here, the experience of a 77-year-old Wiganer – who has made this a general rule over the years – is most instructive.
It all started when, at just 50, he had some difficulty in “getting going” when passing urine probably due, he realised, to an enlarged prostate gland.
In the 27 years since, this has become marginally worse, but he has never felt it necessary to consult his doctor about it.
Fifteen years later, by now in his mid-60s, he began to experience mild anginal pain, when walking up the hill to his home.
Eventually, he did seek advice but declined the suggestion of further investigations as he found a couple of squirts of the anti-angina medicine glyceryl trinitrate, or GTN, was sufficient to get him up most modest inclines.
Then last year, a routine blood test revealed a rare disorder of the bone marrow, myelodysplastic syndrome, with impaired production of platelets and red and white blood cells.
But he feels well enough, and is quite happy to watch and wait to see what happens.
His case is a useful reminder that the natural history of many conditions is for them to progress slowly and tolerably over many years.
Still, there seems little virtue in stoically tolerating one’s symptoms when they might so readily be fixed.
There are now half a dozen different simple procedures for restoring a normal flow of urine in those with an enlarged prostate while a coronary angioplasty, to widen blocked or narrowed coronary arteries, readily abolishes those anginal pains.
Do you go to the GP as soon as you have a symptom?
Or do you worry about "bothering the doctor" and wait to see if symptoms get worse?
Please let us know in the comments below
By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy .
You can opt-out at any time.
Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go.
download the app
Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily.
Read preview
New York City health officials found traces of polio, a disease the US eliminated in 1979, in the wastewater on August 12.
The city and public health experts are urging people who aren't vaccinated against polio to get shot as soon as possible.
People who were vaccinated as children likely do not need a booster shot because a four-dose vaccine series in childhood should last into adulthood, experts told Insider.
This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers.
Become an Insider and start reading now.
However, for unvaccinated or partially vaccinated people, "there is simply nothing more essential" than getting a vaccine — especially for kids — Dr. Ashwin Vasan, New York City's health commissioner, said in the statement.
"Please choose now to get the vaccine," Vasan said.
The polio vaccine is up to 99-100% effective at preventing polio, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Advertisement
If somebody does contract the virus, most will not experience symptoms, but can lead to paralysis and lifelong disability in a minority of people.
Here's how to spot the signs of a polio infection:
Polio symptoms include fever, fatigue, and muscle pain
People contract polio by eating food or drinking water contaminated with the virus, according to the CDC.
The virus is released into wastewater through the feces of infected individuals.
Related stories
The disease can also spread through droplets from a sneeze or cough of an infected person.
Getting stool or cough droplets from an infected person on your hands and touching your mouth can pass the virus to you.
Advertisement
The CDC states most people infected with polio will not have visible symptoms.
One in four infected people will have flu-like symptoms that include:
Sore throat;
Headaches;
Fever;
Nausea;
Fatigue;
Stomach pain.
Celebrities like Alan Alda and Joni Mitchell who contracted polio as children before the vaccine was available said they felt intense muscle pain.
In mild cases, symptoms typically last two to five days and then go away on their own.
In rare cases, polio can lead to paralysis and death
A small proportion of infected people — anywhere between one in 200 or one in 2,000 — will suffer serious symptoms effecting the brain and spinal cord, per the CDC.
Advertisement
The most serious symptom from polio is paralysis, or when a person cannot move parts of their body.
Paralysis, as well as muscle weakness, can impair the legs, arms, or both.
People who experience paralysis from polio tend to have mild symptoms from nonparalytic polio at first, according to Mayo Clinic.
The symptoms become more severe within a week.
Paralysis from polio can lead to lifelong disability or death.
Children who seem to fully recover from polio can develop muscle pain, weakness, and paralysis 15 to 40 years later.
Forty percent of people who survive polio suffer from delayed symptoms, also called "post-polio syndrome" — including Joni Mitchell, who described it feeling like "mind-numbing fatigue.
"
There is no cure for polio, but pain relief and physical therapy can help
Polio does not have a cure, and can only be prevented through highly-effective vaccines.
Widespread vaccination eliminated the disease in the US.
Advertisement
Pain relievers can treat people with mild to severe muscle pain, while moderate exercise in the form of physical therapy can prevent muscle deformaties, per the Mayo Clinic.
People whose breathing muscles become weak from polio may need ventilators, or machines that moves air in and out of your lungs.
The CDC states physical or occupational therapy started when infected early in a person with polio could improve arm or leg weakness.
Antispasmodic drugs can relax the muscles and improve mobility, per the World Health Organization.
Marni Pasch, 39, worked as a high school counselor.
The work was fast-paced, and she loved spending time with the students, but she struggled to keep up with the paperwork.
She could often be found at her desk late into the evening finishing up projects.
It was easier to work without the disruptions of the typical school day.
Pasch took her job seriously — after all, students counted on her.
“My biggest fear was letting a tiny detail slip that might affect a teen’s future,” she said.
To manage her workload, Pasch wrote herself reminders until her desk “looked like a living Post-it note.”
After one difficult day, she threw up her hands.
“I loved my job, even working on weekends to make sure I could balance my duties and see students, but the rewards weren’t enough.”
That night she told her husband she thought she had attention deficit disorder (ADHD or ADD).
He said, “I’ve been telling you that for a while.”
He had made offhand comments for years, as had her stepmother, but Pasch didn’t pay attention to them.
ADHD was something second-grade boys have, not women.
Pasch, after all, had a master’s degree.
True, she had struggled in school, and was often told she “wasn’t living up to her potential” or was lazy.
But she persisted and continued her education.
In college she was placed on academic probation, and carried the “lazy” and “not so bright” labels with her.
When she entered the master’s program, she became focused and graduated with close to a 4.0 GPA.
But her education came at a price.
She became depressed and anxious, and developed an eating disorder.
Pasch learned more about ADHD symptoms, and admitted that she might have it.
She went to her primary care physician and completed a questionnaire.
“It was as if the questionnaire was written for and about me!”
When the doctor told her she had ADHD, she cried, but not out of depression or frustration.
“It was like watching the pieces of my life come together to make a clear picture.”
[Self-Test: ADHD Symptoms in Women]
When Pasch shared her diagnosis with friends, she was surprised by their reactions.
Many friends assumed she had already been diagnosed, and told her, “I thought you just chose not to take medication.”
It seemed that everyone except her knew she had ADHD.
After her diagnosis, Pasch earned her International Coaching Federation certificate.
She now works as an academic coach, helping students improve their organization, time management, and study skills.
“I was told that I wasn’t living up to my potential and that I was lazy.
I had depression and anxiety, as well as eating disorders.
Now I know that those things can be linked to ADHD, especially if it is undiagnosed.
My diagnosis connected the dots in my life.”
At 47, Rick Green, a successful comedy writer, actor, and director, learned about ADHD when he accompanied his son to be evaluated.
When his son entered sixth grade, in a gifted program, he had a hard time keeping up and completing homework.
It was confirmed that he was gifted, and he had ADHD.
When the doctor ticked off the symptoms, Green was surprised and confused.
“I thought everyone is like this,” he said, assuming the rest of the world struggled with lateness, forgetfulness, difficulty following through, and paying attention.
Soon afterward, Green made an appointment with his family doctor to talk about his symptoms.
The doctor confirmed his diagnosis.
Green wondered: “Does this mean I have a mental illness?
Does it mean I’m damaged?”
He had always thought he wasn’t bright, even though he had a degree in physics.
But ADHD?
It had never occurred to him that there was a condition that caused his disorganization and that nagging feeling that he was underachieving.
[How Is ADHD Diagnosed?
Your Free Guide]
The realization that he lived with undiagnosed ADHD brought relief and fear.
Green explained, “The emotional tornado generated by the diagnosis was disorienting.
I went from ‘What a relief’ to ‘Now you tell me!’
to ‘Finally, there’s hope!’”
As he thought about it, he wondered why no one had noticed his ADHD.
Then one day a light bulb went on: “No wonder I was able to write thousands of short skits, but could never finish a single screenplay.”
Later, came “Wow, medication really helps!”
Which quickly turned to, “Damn, if I’d only known sooner, I could have written movies!”
As he came to terms with the diagnosis, he felt more at peace: “The emotion around my failures and struggles started to evaporate,” he said.
“It’s neurology, not a lack of moral fiber.”
His family dismissed his diagnosis.
Despite their denial, Green tried medication and behavioral techniques to manage his symptoms.
His anxiety levels went down, and he was able to focus better than before.
Green found himself constantly explaining ADHD to others and battling the myths surrounding the disorder, which led him to make videos to explain the facts of the disorder.
As he received feedback on how his videos helped people come to terms with their diagnosis and find ways to improve their lives, his perspective changed.
While his videos started from a place of anger, he now makes them from the perspective of love.
He wants others to know that living and thriving with ADHD is possible.
“Even if you are doing OK, you could be doing great.”
Hilary Andreini, of Maplewood, New Jersey, was diagnosed with inattentive ADHD eight years ago, at age 40.
Her adult years had been marked by anxiety.
“I felt like I was floating around aimlessly, trying to look like a responsible grownup and pretending to be strong,” she said.
She knew that something was off, but she didn’t know what.
Maybe she wasn’t that bright.
Maybe her inability to advance in her career, as a manager in human resources, meant she was a failure.
Maybe she was a loser.
“I didn’t understand why my life was so hard, why everyone else seemed to have it easier,” she says.
Then her daughter’s kindergarten teacher suggested that her daughter be evaluated for inattentive ADHD.
Andreini had never heard of inattentive ADHD.
She thought: Didn’t ADHD mean you were hyper?
As she learned more about the disorder, she thought back on her life: “I realized that I had struggled with the same symptoms all my life.”
After diagnosing herself with ADHD, Andreini went to a therapist, who confirmed her diagnosis of ADHD and anxiety.
The years of being hard on herself faded away.
During that time, Andreini says her days were filled with negative self-talk and shame.
“I would sometimes drink to relieve the pressure of feeling like a failure.
Drinking has not turned into a problem, but I still have to be very careful about alcohol.”
The more she learned about ADHD, the more everything made sense.
There’s a medical reason why she has trouble remembering things and why she feels emotions so intensely.
She learned why fear sometimes gripped her and why she couldn’t seem to “get it together.”
With her therapist, Hilary created strategies that worked for her.
Andreini says, “I have learned to forgive myself.
I used to feel guilt and shame about almost everything I did.
My diagnosis lifted that weight.
Since my diagnosis, I went from being an anxious 40-year-old wife and mother to being a calmer, more understanding person.
I have never felt better than I do now.
There are things I can do to help myself become who I have always known I could be.”
As she has learned to live with ADHD, she has “learned to let go of trying to keep up with everyone else.
I can’t remember birthdays.
I have forgiven myself for that.
It’s who I am, and I am valuable in other ways to my friends and family.”
Today, Hilary is an ADHD coach who “helps others learn to forgive themselves and to figure out what they need to be their best selves.”
She is grateful that her children are growing up at a time when there is more information about girls and ADHD.
“I can tell you that the 70s and 80s were not kind to quiet girls who have ADHD.”
Looking back, Shell Mendelson who is a career coach based in San Antonio, is amazed that she made it through high school.
She doodled and daydreamed much more often than she paid attention to the teachers.
College and graduate school were better because she could choose her classes.
She was successful, she says, because she found majors she liked — speech communications in undergrad and vocational rehabilitation counseling in grad school.
She interned during her second year and was offered a job at the company after graduation.
Mendelson has always been an entrepreneur at heart, so she left her first job to start her own business — a career counseling firm.
Then one day she woke up and had an idea for a new business.
It was an after-school program that introduced drawing and art to children.
She called it Kidz Art.
It was so successful that she started franchising the program and soon her art programs were in numerous states and around the world.
Although the company was successful, her disorganization and difficulty setting and reaching goals made it hard to keep up with all the daily tasks of running it.
“People with ADHD are idea people.
We are great at getting things started, but not so great at maintaining them.”
Mendelson stepped down as CEO.
Leaving the company was devastating.
She was depressed and miserable.
At home alone, she felt like a failure.
For much of her life, Mendelson felt as if she was making things up as she went along, and that she didn’t have a clue as to what she was doing.
Her biggest fear was that someone would find out she was an impostor.
At her lowest point, she remembered a book a friend had mailed her a few years before.
It was a book on adult ADHD by Ned Hallowell (#CommissionsEarned).
At the time, she felt offended that her friend would send it to her, but now, feeling defeated, she picked it up and read the introduction.
That’s all it took for Mendelson to realize that she had inattentive ADHD.
She was happy that she had found the reason for her challenges, but she also felt a sense of grief and loss.
“What would my life have been like if I had known earlier?
What have I missed?”
she wondered.
For years Mendelson assumed that friends and family experienced life the way she did: “Why can’t I grab a thought and follow it through.
Why do my thoughts just come and go?”
Now she knew the answer:
ADHD.
Mendelson started medication, but didn’t like the side effects.
She felt wired and her blood pressure shot up.
Now, she self-medicates with caffeine, but she thinks that understanding her ADHD is her best treatment of all.
She knows it takes her longer than it may take other people to get things done, so she schedules plenty of time between client appointments.
This allows her to process what has just been said and to prepare for the next client.
Says Mendelson: “I still get confused.
I am still not organized.
But I have accepted my diagnosis, and that this is who I am.
With that acceptance comes calm and peace.”
[Your Free Guide to ADHD Coping Mechanisms]
#CommissionsEarned As an Amazon Associate, ADDitude earns a commission from qualifying purchases made by ADDitude readers on the affiliate links we share.
However, all products linked in the ADDitude Store have been independently selected by our editors and/or recommended by our readers.
Prices are accurate and items in stock as of time of publication
Lower back pain is a potential symptom of both acute and long COVID-19.
Viral infections can directly cause muscle pain, while immobility due to fever can also worsen muscle tension.
This information comes from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) .
During the COVID-19 pandemic, back pain rates rose.
A 2021 study in Malta found that 30% of participants reported back pain prior to the pandemic.
After the pandemic, 49% reported back pain, many of whom had not experienced it before having COVID-19.
In addition to COVID-19 itself, other aspects of the pandemic may have led more people to develop back pain.
For example, people may have exercised less during a lockdown, resulting in a risk of back pain.
In addition, those working from home may not have had a suitable workstation, causing them to adopt incorrect posture throughout the working day.
Keep reading to learn more about the link between lower back pain and COVID-19.
Coronavirus data All data and statistics are based on publicly available data at the time of publication.
Some information may be out of date.
Visit our coronavirus hub for the most recent information on COVID-19.
Was this helpful?
Is lower back pain a long COVID symptom?
Lower back pain is something that people with long COVID can experience.
Long COVID is the name for the collection of symptoms that some people continue to have for weeks, months, or years after having COVID-19.
A 2022 study found that lower back pain was common among people whose symptoms persisted past the acute stage.
Similarly, in a 2021 study, researchers contacted people who had previously stayed in hospital due to COVID-19 at 3 and 6 months after they went home.
At 3 months, 74.6% had at least one rheumatic or musculoskeletal symptom.
At 6 months, the figure was 43.2%.
Long COVID is not well-understood.
Researchers currently remain unsure why some people continue to have symptoms and others do not, or why different people develop different symptoms.
Learn more about long COVID and how long it lasts.
How can you tell if the pain is due to COVID-19?
Back pain can occur for many reasons.
The only way to determine whether it is happening due to COVID-19 is to undergo testing.
If a person has back pain along with other symptoms, COVID-19 may be the cause.
Other common symptoms of COVID-19 include: fever or chills
muscle aches
fatigue
cough
a headache
new loss of taste or smell
a sore throat
a blocked or runny nose
nausea or vomiting
diarrhea It is possible to have COVID-19 and not experience all of these symptoms.
Some people have very mild symptoms.
In some cases, muscle aches may be the only symptom, which is why it is important to get a test.
What to do if symptoms occur Anyone who suspects that they have COVID-19 should follow the guidance of their local health authority.
In the United States, the CDC recommends that people who feel unwell stay home and seek testing as soon as possible.
People can get tests for free via the COVID.gov website or by contacting their doctor by phone.
They should not visit a healthcare facility in person unless a doctor specifically advises doing so.
People who have COVID-19 can usually care for themselves at home.
Anyone who tests positive should stay home for 5 days and keep some distance from others in the household to prevent the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
People with an increased risk of serious illness should ask a doctor about getting treatment, as antiviral drugs can reduce the risk.
These medications are most effective when a person starts taking them early.
If a person suddenly develops more serious symptoms, it is important to dial 911 or the number of the nearest emergency department.
Signs that a person with COVID-19 needs immediate care include: trouble breathing
blue, gray, or white lips and nails
pain or pressure in the chest
new confusion
inability to stay awake
How long will the back pain last?
Most people recover from COVID-19 in a few days to a few weeks .
If the back pain is solely due to the illness, it should clear up when the other symptoms resolve.
If the back pain is due to a lack of movement during a lockdown or hospital stay, it may improve with physical therapy.
A doctor can provide more information about this treatment.
People who get long COVID may develop more persistent back pain, which could last much longer.
Some people with long COVID find that the symptoms gradually get better over time.
At-home care for lower back pain A number of self-management techniques may help ease lower back pain.
They include : Over-the-counter (OTC) pain medications: Ibuprofen, aspirin, and acetaminophen may help alleviate back pain.
They can also relieve other COVID-19 symptoms, such as fever.
Ibuprofen, aspirin, and acetaminophen may help alleviate back pain.
They can also relieve other COVID-19 symptoms, such as fever.
Ice or heat: Applying ice or heat may help relieve symptoms.
Some people find relief from alternating between the two.
Applying ice or heat may help relieve symptoms.
Some people find relief from alternating between the two.
Rest:
Resting tense, sore back muscles for a few days may help.
A person should avoid heavy lifting and awkward positions.
Resting tense, sore back muscles for a few days may help.
A person should avoid heavy lifting and awkward positions.
Massage:
Some people find that massaging the affected area eases pain.
Some people find that massaging the affected area eases pain.
Exercise:
Gentle forms of exercise, such as stretching or yoga, might help loosen tense back muscles.
People may also find that gradually increasing their activity level eases back pain that results from being sedentary.
Other possible causes of lower back pain People develop back pain for many reasons.
Other factors that could explain the pain include: an injury, such as a sprain or fracture
inflammation
muscle weakness
a chronic illness, such as arthritis Various factors can also predict a higher risk for persistent back pain.
These include: prior episodes of back pain
smoking
stress or anxiety
depression
a higher body weight If a person tests negative for COVID-19 and continues to experience back pain, they should contact a doctor for advice.
Pantelis C, Lambert TJ.
Managing patients with “treatment-resistant” schizophrenia.
Med J Aust.
2003;178:S62–6.
Andreasen NC, Carpenter WT Jr., Kane JM, Lasser RA, Marder SR, Weinberger DR.
Remission in schizophrenia: proposed criteria and rationale for consensus.
Am J Psychiatry.
2005;162:441–9.
Warnez S, Alessi-Severini S. Clozapine: a review of clinical practice guidelines and prescribing trends.
BMC Psychiatry.
2014;14:102.
Spina E, Avenoso A, Facciola G, Scordo MG, Ancione M, Madia AG, et al. Relationship between plasma concentrations of clozapine and norclozapine and therapeutic response in patients with schizophrenia resistant to conventional neuroleptics.
Psychopharmacol (Berl).
2000;148:83–9.
Freudenreich O, McEvoy J Guidelines for prescribing clozapine in schizophrenia.
Waltham, MA 2018.
Piwowarska J, Radziwon-Zaleska M, Dmochowska M, Szepietowska E, Matsumoto H, Sygitowicz G, et al.
The usefulness of monitored therapy using Clozapine concentration in the blood serum for determining drug dose in Polish schizophrenic patients.
Pharm Rep. 2016;68:1120–5.
Hiemke C, Bergemann N, Clement HW, Conca A, Deckert J, Domschke K, et al.
Consensus guidelines for therapeutic drug monitoring in neuropsychopharmacology: update 2017.
Pharmacopsychiatry.
2018;51:9–62.
Dragovic S, Gunness P, Ingelman-Sundberg M, Vermeulen NP, Commandeur JN.
Characterization of human cytochrome P450s involved in the bioactivation of clozapine.
Drug Metab Dispos.
2013;41:651–8.
Jaquenoud Sirot E, Knezevic B, Morena GP, Harenberg S, Oneda B, Crettol S, et al. ABCB1 and cytochrome P450 polymorphisms: clinical pharmacogenetics of clozapine.
J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2009;29:319–26.
Brennan MD.
Pharmacogenetics of second-generation antipsychotics.
Pharmacogenomics.
2014;15:869–84.
Lee ST, Ryu S, Kim SR, Kim MJ, Kim S, Kim JW, et al. Association study of 27 annotated genes for clozapine pharmacogenetics: validation of preexisting studies and identification of a new candidate gene, ABCB1, for treatment response.
J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2012;32:441–8.
Pouget JG, Shams TA, Tiwari AK, Muller DJ.
Pharmacogenetics and outcome with antipsychotic drugs.
Dialogues Clin Neurosci.
2014;16:555–66.
Preskorn SH, Kane CP, Lobello K, Nichols AI, Fayyad R, Buckley G, et al.
Cytochrome P450 2D6 phenoconversion is common in patients being treated for depression: implications for personalized medicine.
J Clin Psychiatry.
2013;74:614–21.
Shah RR, Smith RL.
Addressing phenoconversion: the Achilles’ heel of personalized medicine.
Br J Clin Pharm.
2015;79:222–40.
Mostafa S, Kirkpatrick CMJ, Byron K, Sheffield L An analysis of allele, genotype and phenotype frequencies, actionable pharmacogenomic (PGx) variants and phenoconversion in 5408 Australian patients genotyped for CYP2D6, CYP2C19, CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genes.
J Neural Transm (Vienna).
2018;8–15.
Seppala NH, Leinonen EV, Lehtonen ML, Kivisto KT.
Clozapine serum concentrations are lower in smoking than in non-smoking schizophrenic patients.
Pharm Toxicol. 1999;85:244–6.
Meyer JM.
Individual changes in clozapine levels after smoking cessation: results and a predictive model.
J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2001;21:569–74.
Barnes TRE, Paton C. Antipsychotic polypharmacy in schizophrenia.
CNS Drugs.
2011;25:383–99.
First MB, Spitzer RL, Gibbon M, Williams JBW.
Structured clinical interview for DSM-IV axis I disorders, clinician version (SCID-CV).
Washington, D.C.:
American Psychiatric Press, Inc; 1996.
Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, Amorim P, Janavs J, Weiller E, et al.
The mini-international neuropsychiatric interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM-IV and ICD-10.
J Clin Psychiatry.
1998;59(Suppl 20):22–33.
quiz 4-57
Kay SR, Fiszbein A, Opler LA.
The positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia.
Schizophr Bull.
1987;13:261–76.
World Medical Association.
World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki: ethical principles for medical research involving human subjects.
JAMA.
2013;310:2191–4.
Mostaid MS, Lee TT, Chana G, Sundram S, Shannon Weickert C, Pantelis C, et al.
Elevated peripheral expression of neuregulin-1 (NRG1) mRNA isoforms in clozapine-treated schizophrenia patients.
Transl Psychiatry.
2017;7:1280.
Enoch MA, Shen PH, Xu K, Hodgkinson C, Goldman D. Using ancestry-informative markers to define populations and detect population stratification.
J Psychopharmacol.
2006;20(4 Suppl):19–26.
Gaedigk A, Simon SD, Pearce RE, Bradford LD, Kennedy MJ, Leeder JS.
The CYP2D6 activity score: translating genotype information into a qualitative measure of phenotype.
Clin Pharm Ther.
2008;83:234–42.
Hicks JK, Swen JJ, Gaedigk A. Challenges in CYP2D6 phenotype assignment from genotype data: a critical assessment and call for standardization.
Curr Drug Metab.
2014;15:218–32.
Mrazek DA, Biernacka JM, O’Kane DJ, Black JL, Cunningham JM, Drews MS, et al.
CYP2C19 variation and citalopram response.
Pharmacogenet Genomics.
2011;21:1–9.
Saiz-Rodríguez M, Ochoa D, Belmonte C, Román M, Vieira de Lara D, Zubiaur P, et al. Polymorphisms in CYP1A2, CYP2C9 and ABCB1 affect agomelatine pharmacokinetics.
J Psychopharmacol.
2019;33:522–31.
Jeppesen U, Gram LF, Vistisen K, Loft S, Poulsen HE, Brøsen K. Dose-dependent inhibition of CYP1A2, CYP2C19 and CYP2D6 by citalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine and paroxetine.
Eur J Clin Pharm.
1996;51:73–8.
Harvey AT, Preskorn SH.
Fluoxetine pharmacokinetics and effect on CYP2C19 in young and elderly volunteers.
J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2001;21:161–6.
Preskorn SH, Greenblatt DJ, Flockhart D, Luo Y, Perloff ES, Harmatz JS, et al.
Comparison of duloxetine, escitalopram, and sertraline effects on cytochrome P450 2D6 function in healthy volunteers.
J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2007;27:28–34.
Klieber M, Oberacher H, Hofstaetter S, Beer B, Neururer M, Amann A, et al.
CYP2C19 phenoconversion by routinely prescribed proton pump inhibitors omeprazole and esomeprazole: clinical implications for personalized medicine.
J Pharm Exp Ther.
2015;354:426–30.
Hägg S, Spigset O, Dahlqvist R. Influence of gender and oral contraceptives on CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 activity in healthy volunteers.
Br J Clin Pharm.
2001;51:169–73.
Dobrinas M, Cornuz J, Oneda B, Kohler Serra M, Puhl M, Eap CB.
Impact of smoking, smoking cessation, and genetic polymorphisms on CYP1A2 activity and inducibility.
Clin Pharm Ther.
2011;90:117–25.
Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing.
J R Stat SocietySeries B (Methodol).
1995;57:289–300.
Jamovi.
The jamovi project.
Version 0.9.
Jamovi. https://www.jamovi.org; 2019.
Excoffier L, Lischer HE.
Arlequin suite ver 3.5: a new series of programs to perform population genetics analyses under Linux and Windows.
Mol Ecol Resour.
2010;10:564–7.
Vasudev K, Choi YH, Norman R, Kim RB, Schwarz UI.
Genetic determinants of clozapine-induced metabolic side effects.
Can J Psychiatry.
2017;62:138–49.
Wiciński M, Węclewicz MM, Miętkiewicz M, Malinowski B, Grześk E, Klonowska J. Potential mechanisms of hematological adverse drug reactions in patients receiving clozapine in combination with proton pump inhibitors.
J Psychiatr Pract.
2017;23:114–20.
van Veggel M, Olofinjana O, Davies G, Taylor D. Clozapine and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) - an investigation of temporal association.
Acta Psychiatr Scand.
2013;127:69–77.
Piatkov I, Caetano D, Assur Y, Lau SL, Coelho M, Jones T, et al.
CYP2C19*17 protects against metabolic complications of clozapine treatment.
World J Biol Psychiatry.
2017;18:521–7.
Diaz FJ, Eap CB, Ansermot N, Crettol S, Spina E, de Leon J. Can valproic acid be an inducer of clozapine metabolism?
Pharmacopsychiatry.
2014;47:89–96.
Finley P, Warner D. Potential impact of valproic acid therapy on clozapine disposition.
Biol Psychiatry.
1994;36:487–8.
Longo LP, Salzman C. Valproic acid effects on serum concentrations of clozapine and norclozapine.
Am J Psychiatry.
1995;152:650.
Rostami-Hodjegan A, Amin AM, Spencer EP, Lennard MS, Tucker GT, Flanagan RJ.
Influence of dose, cigarette smoking, age, sex, and metabolic activity on plasma clozapine concentrations: a predictive model and nomograms to aid clozapine dose adjustment and to assess compliance in individual patients.
J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2004;24:70–8.
Thyroid cancer disproportionally affects women more than men.
However, vocal changes, neck pain, and persistent coughing are common thyroid cancer symptoms in anyone.
Cancer occurs when cells in your body grow abnormally, replicating damaged DNA, the genetic code your body uses for development and survival.
Thyroid cancer is cancer that develops in your thyroid gland, the gland in your neck that generates hormones responsible for regulating processes like metabolism, heart rate, and body temperature.
While women are three times more likely to develop thyroid cancer than men, the signs and symptoms of thyroid cancer are the same for everyone, regardless of sex or gender.
Language matters You’ll notice that the language used to share statistics and other data points is pretty binary, fluctuating between “female” and “women” and “men.”
Although we typically avoid language like this, specificity is key when reporting on research participants and clinical findings.
The studies and surveys referenced in this article didn’t report data on, or include, participants who were transgender, nonbinary, gender nonconforming, genderqueer, agender, or genderless.
Was this helpful?
What are the symptoms of thyroid cancer in women?
Thyroid cancer presents similarly for women and men.
Symptoms may include: swelling in the neck
frontal neck pain
a lump in the neck
permanent vocal changes or hoarseness
difficulty swallowing
trouble breathing
persistent coughing unrelated to sickness or allergies However, many people with thyroid cancer do not have symptoms.
This is because thyroid cancers typically do not affect thyroid function, so the hallmark signs of too high or too low thyroid hormones are not usually present.
When thyroid cancer does affect thyroid function in rare cases, you may notice subtle symptoms caused by too little or too much thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism), such as: weight changes
feeling too cold or too hot
muscle weakness
fatigue
body aches
dry skin or hair
face puffiness
changes in how much you sweat
trouble sleeping
eye irritation
mood changes
appetite increase or decrease Thyroid dysfunction can cause changes in your monthly menstrual cycle, too.
This can result in periods that are lighter or heavier or are happening more or less often.
Thyroid cancer skin manifestations According to research from 2023, skin changes may occur along with thyroid cancer.
This may be due to underlying genetic conditions or because the cancer has spread to the skin tissue.
These skin changes can appear as follows: Hyperpigmented areas: areas of darker skin that typically appear around the upper shoulder
areas of darker skin that typically appear around the upper shoulder Mucosal neuromas: benign nerve tissue tumors in the mouth
benign nerve tissue tumors in the mouth Oral papillomas: skin tumors in the mouth
skin tumors in the mouth Trichilemmoma: small wart-like growths usually on the face or neck
small wart-like growths usually on the face or neck Acral keratosis: wart-like lumps primarily seen on the hands and feet
Is thyroid cancer more common among women?
Women are disproportionately affected by thyroid cancer.
It’s three times more common in women than men.
The reasons for this aren’t well understood.
Some research suggests men and women experience thyroid cancer equally, and that women are more likely to detect thyroid cancer.
Other theories point to natural female hormonal cycles that may play a role in an increased risk of thyroid cancer.
A 2021 study found that women who began menopause at age 45 or older had a higher risk of thyroid cancer, compared with women who began menopause at a younger age.
Thyroid cancer survival rate for women While women are diagnosed with thyroid cancer more often than men, survival rates are similar.
Thyroid cancer survival rates vary depending on if the cancer is localized to its original location, regionally spread into nearby tissues, or has moved to distant sites around the body.
Survival rates also vary depending on the type of thyroid cancer.
According to the American Cancer Society (ACS) , 5-year survival rates for papillary, follicular, and medullary thyroid cancers have similar projections: Localized: greater than 99.5%
greater than 99.5% Regional: 99% for papillary, 98% for follicular, and 92% for medullary
99% for papillary, 98% for follicular, and 92% for medullary Distant: 74% for papillary, 67% for follicular, and 43% for medullary Anaplastic thyroid cancer is often more aggressive and challenging to treat.
Its 5-year survival rates are: Localized: 39%
39% Regional: 11%
11% Distant: 4% Survival rates compare the likelihood that someone with thyroid cancer is to survive for 5 years after receiving a diagnosis, compared with someone without thyroid cancer.
For example, a 99.5% survival rate suggests that someone with the condition is 99.5% as likely to live for 5 years as someone not living with cancer.
Many factors can affect survival rates, including age, overall health, and treatment options.
It is important to know that the data listed above is based on people who were diagnosed with thyroid cancer between 2012 and 2018.
Thyroid cancer treatments have improved in recent years, and survival rates may have increased as a result.
If wavering attention and lapses in memory persistently interrupt your day, you could be experiencing symptoms of a mild neurocognitive disorder.
It’s natural to forget where you set your keys down once in a while.
Maybe you don’t retain information as well as you used to or you feel distracted every now and then.
But if these distractions and memory lapses are unusual and they keep happening, it might be more than absentmindedness.
These modest changes in your cognitive function may be what’s known as mild neurocognitive disorder, a mental decline that’s noticeable but may not yet significantly impact your daily function.
Understanding mild neurocognitive disorder Mild neurocognitive disorder is included in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition (DSM-5) as a formal diagnosis under neurocognitive disorders.
In sum, it refers to a modest yet recognizable cognitive decline in one or more areas.
Cognitive refers to mental processes that allow you to acquire knowledge and understand your experiences.
Remembering something, learning a new word, and making a decision are all examples of cognitive function.
Mild neurocognitive disorder may occur from unspecified causes, or it could manifest as a symptom of: onset of Alzheimer’s disease
frontotemporal lobar degeneration
Huntington’s disease
Parkinson’s disease
prion disease
substance or medication use
HIV infection
vascular disease
traumatic brain injury
Lewy body dementia
How does a health professional diagnose it?
A physician, psychiatrist, or other mental health professionals can diagnose the condition.
They’ll be looking for the following criteria in order to reach a diagnosis: A. Evidence of decline or mild impairment in: focus and attention
ability to make decisions and plan events
learning and memory
language
perception and movement
ability to interact with others This evidence can come from cognitive and medical tests or from information people close to you have gathered.
B. The decline may represent a greater effort in completing some tasks but wouldn’t interfere with the ability of the person to do them independently.
In other words, you’re still capable of functioning in the world but it may take you a bit longer or specific accommodations to perform everyday tasks.
C. Symptoms aren’t related to an episode of delirium.
D. There are no other possible explanations for the symptoms, like another mental health diagnosis.
Mild neurocognitive disorder may present with or without changes in behavior.
For example, it could present with or without signs of apathy, agitation, or mood changes.
Symptoms may also present at any age and aren’t related to aging.
Symptoms of mild neurocognitive disorder Symptoms of mild neurocognitive disorder may differ depending on the underlying cause.
Not everyone will experience the same symptoms or with the same intensity.
Mild neurocognitive disorder from a traumatic brain injury, for example, might present differently than as a result of Alzheimer’s disease.
Common signs of mild neurocognitive disorder may include: forgetfulness
difficulty recalling, retaining, or learning new information
inability to make sound judgments
behavior changes
confusion
anxiety
difficulty concentrating
memory loss
changes in visual perception
conversation or language challenges Forgetfulness Forgetfulness doesn’t always mean memory loss.
It can be momentary, and it can be as simple as walking into a room and not remembering what you went in there for.
Difficulty recalling, retaining, or learning new information You may find that you don’t hang on to information as well as you used to.
This might mean reading an article and being unable to recall details a few minutes later, for example.
Inability to make sound judgments Your judgment may have lapses if you have mild neurocognitive disorder.
This doesn’t mean you can’t make decisions, but it may mean you may not always consider all alternatives.
For example, you might buy into a scam online or decide to drive after too many drinks.
Behavioral changes Changes in behavior can present in many ways.
You might find you’re suddenly inclined toward impulsive behavior.
Maybe your friends and family notice you’ve become withdrawn or more irritable.
These changes don’t have to be extreme to be a sign of mild neurocognitive disorder.
Confusion Confusion occurs when you can’t think clearly, or things don’t make sense to you for a while.
Planning for a project, for example, might feel like a challenge if the steps don’t make sense to you or you can’t anticipate the end result.
Anxiety Mild neurocognitive disorder may cause anxiety as you become aware your cognitive function is declining.
You may be worried it’s a symptom of a more serious condition, and you might wonder if you’ll need daily assistance in the future.
It’s natural to feel this way when you first become aware of these changes.
Difficulty concentrating You may experience difficulty focusing on large or small tasks, following conversations, or attending lengthy events.
Memory loss More substantial than forgetfulness, short-term memory loss in mild neurocognitive disorder can mean forgetting names, places, or important dates.
You might find you don’t remember appointments or don’t recall bumping into an old friend while you were running errands.
Changes in visual perception Research suggests changes in vision go hand-in-hand with cognitive decline.
This may be due to inflammatory processes in the brain that damage cells and nerve pathways.
Blurred vision, diminished vision, or any changes to your normal sight can be better explained by a health professional.
Conversation or language challenges Mild neurocognitive disorder can impact the areas of the brain related to communication.
You may forget words mid-sentence, or find it challenging to think of how to express what you’re thinking or feeling.
Differences between major and mild neurocognitive disorder The main difference between major and mild neurocognitive disorders is the intensity and severity of the symptoms and how much they interfere with your independence.
When you live with major neurocognitive disorder, you often need help during the day, particularly with complex tasks like paying bills or managing medications.
You may also have a hard time remembering important things, like people’s names or even who they are.
What’s the difference between mild neurocognitive disorder and dementia?
Mild neurocognitive disorder isn’t dementia or Alzheimer’s disease.
It’s the “middle ground” where signs of cognitive decline are visible but haven’t yet progressed into an impairing condition.
There can be many causes of mild neurocognitive disorder, and it may never progress beyond modest decline of cognitive functions.
Dementia is an older term for major neurocognitive disorder.
It’s used to describe the point where cognitive decline prevents you from performing many activities on your own.
Alzheimer’s disease is a specific form of major neurocognitive disorder, characterized by changes in the brain that worsen over time and impact your cognitive functions.
Was this helpful?
Can mild neurocognitive disorder be treated?
There are currently no medications approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of mild neurocognitive disorder.
Certain lifestyle choices, however, have been shown in meta-analysis to be a promising way of slowing down the signs of cognitive decline.
The FDA has approved fezolinetant (Veozah), an oral medication to treat moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms caused by menopause, according to an agency press release.1
This is the first neurokinin 3 (NK3) receptor antagonist approved for this condition.
Vasomotor symptoms are characterized by hot flashes and/or night sweats and are the most common symptoms of menopause that lead to women seeking treatment.2
According to a press release from manufacturer Astellas, approximately 60% to 80% of women in the United States experience these symptoms “during or after the menopausal transition,” which can disrupt a woman’s daily activities and negatively impact her overall quality of life.
The balance between estrogen and neurokinin B work to regulate the body’s temperature control center.
However, during menopause, estrogen declines and the balance is disrupted.
This imbalance is what leads to vasomotor symptoms, which fezolinetant helps re-balance by blocking neurokinin B in the brain’s temperature control center.
“Hot flashes as a result of menopause can be a serious physical burden on women and impact their quality of life,” said Janet Maynard, MD, MHS, director of the Office of Rare Diseases, Pediatrics, Urologic and Reproductive Medicine in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.
“The introduction of a new molecule to treat moderate to severe menopausal hot flashes will provide an additional safe and effective treatment option for women.”
Fezolinetant effectiveness was demonstrated through the Bright Sky Phase 3 program, which included the SKYLIGHT 1 (NCT04003155) and SKYLIGHT 2 (NCT04003142), each of which enrolled over 1000 participants (mean age, 54 years) experiencing moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms.
These trials each included a 12-week double-blinded, placebo-controlled phase followed by a 40-week treatment extension period.
SKYLIGHT 4 (NCT04003389) is a 52-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled study designed to evaluate the long-term safety of the drug.
Patients taking fezolinetant should take one 45 mg pill by mouth once daily, at the same time each day, with or without food.
Fezolinetant prescribing information includes a warning for elevated hepatic transaminase.
Prior to beginning treatment, and every 3 months for the first 9 months of treatment, patients should have bloodwork done to test for liver damage.
This medication cannot be used with CYP1A2 inhibitors.
“Today’s approval of fezolinetant is a significant and…long awaited milestone for individuals in the US who experience moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms during the menopausal transition,” said Genevieve Neal-Perry, MD, PhD, chair of the UNC School of Medicine Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology.
“I’m excited to know that patients will have the option to choose this nonhormonal treatment.”
References
Send this page to someone via email
Pediatric hospitals across Canada are coping with record-high numbers of children being admitted in the wake of the Omicron wave sweeping the country.
According to experts, kids under five are more likely to be hospitalized compared with other age groups since they are not eligible for vaccines yet, and may experience symptoms that are different from those found in adults.
Omicron cases in infants under one year of age are almost seven times more likely to lead to hospitalizations, Canada’s chief public health officer
Dr. Theresa Tam said Friday,
According to Jesse Papenburg, a pediatric infectious disease specialist and medical microbiologist in Québec, high levels of community spread are happening now and a lot of the children coming to hospitals for screening have contracted COVID-19 incidentally.
Story continues below advertisement
Hospitalizations may have increased among children compared with previous waves, but right now they are low overall, comprising less than one per cent of total reported cases in children under five years of age.
However, it’s expected “the actual numbers [will] be higher than in preceding waves,” Tam said.
No matter what respiratory virus infants get, they are likely to be more severely affected than adults, Tam said.
How does Omicron impact infants?
Symptoms of COVID-19 can vary from person to person, within different age groups, and depending on the variant, but Papenburg said that, like adults, children under the age of five can go from completely asymptomatic to having mild symptoms.
Some of the more commonly reported symptoms include new or worsening cough, shortness of breath, feeling feverish, and chills.
Story continues below advertisement
In an interview with Global News, Papenburg explained that Omicron in very young children gets to their airways, whereas in adults the deeper lung tissues are affected.
The latest health and medical news emailed to you every Sunday.
“In young babies especially, if they have a lot of secretions, those secretions can block the lower airways and cause what we call bronchiolitis.
And some kids are getting bronchiolitis due to their COVID-19 infection, especially children less than one year of age,” Papenbrug said.
1:40 Perspective on how COVID-19 hospitalizations are now reported
According to the Mayo Clinic, Bronchiolitis is a common lung infection in young children and infants.
It causes inflammation and congestion in the small airways of the lung.
Bronchiolitis starts out with symptoms similar to those of the common cold, but then progresses to coughing, wheezing, and sometimes difficulty breathing.
“The small airways in the lungs are very small in young children, so it doesn’t take much mucus to block it up.
And then they run into difficulty with their breathing and require assistance, either in terms of oxygen therapy or mechanical ventilation,” Papenburg said.
Story continues below advertisement
He said the virus, which causes this condition, the respiratory syncytial virus is the number one cause of admission to hospitals for infants.
It’s something COVID-19 can trigger.
Unlike adults, infants and children can experience an infrequent complication of COVID-19 infection identified as a multisystem inflammatory syndrome.
According to the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, the syndrome is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs.
“It’s a post-infectious phenomenon that occurs typically somewhere between two to six weeks after what is typically seen as a very benign COVID infection,” Papenburg said.
“So these children can get very sick, very fast,” he added.
He said, so far, there haven’t been any deaths reported in pediatrics due to this condition, adding that hospitals have anti-inflammatory medications that work very well to help with this hyper-inflammatory state.
How to prevent severe illness in babies?
To protect children under the age of five who are not eligible for vaccines, Dr. Tam said adults around them need to up their game by protecting themselves through vaccination and masking.
Story continues below advertisement
Currently, Tam said there are still millions more Canadians that need to get vaccines.
According to official data, over 6.7 million eligible people still need a first or second dose of their primary series.
She also stressed the importance of getting vaccinated while pregnant.
2:03 Growing fears some are letting their guard down against Omicron variant
“Research shows that vaccination during pregnancy triggers the development of protective antibodies that can also be passed on to that young infant,” she said.
Papenburg said “parents should be concerned” because there can be severe outcomes with regards to COVID-19 in children.
“But thankfully these outcomes are much less frequent than we see in an adult population,” he said.
“Even though there’s massive community transmission, we’re seeing hospitalizations, but less hospitalizations than we would see during peak respiratory … virus season for children.”
Story continues below advertisement
Papenburg also pointed out pediatric infectious disease specialists like himself are seeing more hospitalizations due to influenza than COVID-19 among children.
“I think the message is if you have a child that’s sick for whatever reason, whether you think it might be COVID or for another reason, we have the ability to take care of that child and our emergency room is open.
Our wards are open.
Our intensive rooms are open and functioning,” he said.
This article has been reviewed according to Science X's editorial process and policies .
Editors have highlighted the following attributes while ensuring the content's credibility:
Illustration of obstruction of ventilation.
Credit:
Habib M’henni / public domain
A treatment for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) can also reduce night-time heartburn, coughing and wheezing according to a study published in ERJ Open Research.
People with OSA often snore loudly, their breathing starts and stops during the night, and they may wake up several times.
Not only does this cause tiredness, but it can also increase the risk of high blood pressure, stroke, heart disease and type 2 diabetes.
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machines work by blowing air through a face mask throughout the night to prevent the user's airway from closing.
CPAP is offered to people with OSA to help them sleep better, but the new research suggests that the treatment may bring extra benefits.
The study was led by Professor Thorarinn Gislason, from the department of sleep at Landspitali—The National University Hospital of Iceland in Reykjavík.
He said, "When we experience heartburn or acid reflux, we are feeling stomach acid traveling up toward the throat.
People with obstructive sleep apnea are three times more likely to suffer regularly with night-time heartburn.
Respiratory symptoms, such as coughing and wheezing, are also more common.
"
Professor Gislason and his colleagues used data from the Icelandic Sleep Apnea Cohort study, including 822 patients diagnosed with moderate to severe OSA.
Before starting CPAP treatment, the patients took part in an overnight sleep study and answered detailed sleep questionnaires, including whether they had heartburn or belching at night.
Two years after beginning CPAP treatment, participants returned for a follow-up visit with new evaluation.
Researchers were also able to measure how regularly each person used CPAP via data stored by the CPAP machines.
The study showed that people who were regularly using the CPAP machines were around 42% less likely to suffer with night-time heartburn, compared to those who used the machines a little or not at all.
This decrease in reflux among CPAP users seemed to result in more than a four-fold decrease in the risk of productive morning cough and almost a four-fold decrease in the risk of chronic bronchitis.
Regular CPAP users were also less likely to suffer with wheezing, but the data suggests this was a direct result of the treatment, rather than being caused by the reduction in night-time reflux.
Researchers say that because CPAP treatment keeps the upper airway open during sleep, this probably helps the valve between the stomach and the food pipe to keep closed, which could stop acid from leaking out of the stomach.
Professor Gislason said, "Obstructive sleep apnea is a common condition and, although we have good ways to diagnose and treat it, many people do not realize they have this problem.
"
"I'm 71 years old and I have been a specialist lung doctor all my working life.
I have seen many patients with recurrent respiratory symptoms who have been diagnosed with OSA and recovered when they got CPAP treatment.
"
"Snoring, frequent waking and day-time tiredness are established signs of OSA.
This study suggests that coughing and wheezing that do not get better with the usual treatments and night-time reflux should also be considered as possible signs of OSA that may require CPAP treatment.
"
Professor Winfried Randerath, Head of the European Respiratory Society's Assembly on sleep disordered breathing, who was not involved in the research said, "OSA may manifest as loud snoring at night and daytime sleepiness, but research is showing that its effects can be widespread and serious.
This study adds to our understanding of the risks of OSA, but it also shows how using CPAP treatment can help to reduce those risks.
"
"People who think they may have OSA should speak to their doctor.
Those who have been diagnosed and offered CPAP treatment should try to use the machine regularly as we are learning more and more about the health benefits that CPAP can bring.
"
More information: Thorarinn Gislason et al, Positive airway pressure treatment affect respiratory symptoms and gastroesophageal reflux, ERJ Open Research (2023).
DOI: 10.1183/23120541.00387-2023
Provided by European Respiratory Society
A mother takes her daughter to the family doctor because she’s always tired and lacks energy.
The doctor notes that the linings of her eyelids are pale and concludes that she has iron deficiency anemia.
The doctor prescribes iron.
Another mother hears from her daughter’s teacher that she isn’t sitting still and paying attention in class.
The teacher does some rating scales that confirm this observation.
The mother takes these comments and forms to the family doctor, who says, “Why don’t we put her on Ritalin (or Adderall or Dexedrine or Strattera….)?”
In each case, the doctor has observed symptoms that suggest a problem.
However, before treatment is started, it’s critical to clarify the specific cause of it.
Clearly, in the first case, the doctor would do several diagnostic tests before concluding the cause of anemia and starting a treatment plan.
This approach is just as critical in making a diagnosis of attention deficit disorder (ADHD or ADD).
Yes, your child or adolescent might be overactive, inattentive, and/or impulsive.
But these behaviors could be caused by anxiety, a mood disorder, a learning disability, family problems, or even pinworms (which can cause itchiness around a child’s rear end).
It’s essential that the physician explore and find the cause of the behavior (see Diagnosing ADHD, below).
[Free Resource: Is It More Than Just ADHD??]
More Than ADHD
While it’s essential for a physician to make a definitive diagnosis of ADHD, it’s equally important for him or her to look for other problems that often coexist with it.
These are called comorbidities.
Once a diagnosis is made, starting treatment with the appropriate medication is critical.
But medication isn’t the sole answer.
In fact, kids with ADHD who are only on medication have less successful outcomes than those who receive help for other problems they might have.
Your family doctor may not know this.
So you must be informed to shape the evaluation process and treatment plan.
Toward that end, here is what you should know about the most common conditions associated with ADHD and a basic treatment plan for each:
Learning Disabilities
Fifty percent of children and adolescents with ADHD also have some type of learning disability (LD), such as dyslexia or auditory processing disorder.
An LD may explain why a child with ADHD on medication can sit still and stay focused and yet do poorly academically.
There could also be another reason for academic failure.
If the ADHD diagnosis isn’t made until the fourth or fifth grade, it’s possible that a child will have gaps in basic skills, especially math and language arts, prior to receiving treatment for ADHD.
While this student may not have a learning disability, he will need academic interventions to help him or her catch up.
Course of action: Speak with your school professionals about assessing your child to see if he or she has a learning disability.
If they refuse, you might try getting a private assessment.
If your student has an LD, he/she will need special education services, along with appropriate accommodations in the classroom.
[Self-Test: Could My Child Have a Learning Disability?]
Emotional Problems
Fifty percent of those diagnosed with ADHD will have so-called regulatory problems — difficulty regulating their emotions.
Some might struggle with anxiety, possibly having panic attacks, while others may experience a mood disorder.
Other children may have trouble controlling their anger, while still others might have difficulty regulating their thoughts and behaviors, which can result in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Some kids have trouble controlling their motor behavior (tics are a common symptom).
Such problems are caused by faulty wiring in an area of the brain other than that involved in ADHD.
If your child has any of these problems, and if they have been chronic and pervasive, it’s essential that they be diagnosed.
Course of action: Speak to your family doctor and request a referral to a mental health professional.
(Since medication may be needed, it would be efficient to see a child and adolescent psychiatrist, who, unlike a psychologist, can prescribe medication.)
If your child has a regulatory problem, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) may help significantly.
Behavioral Problems
Unlike regulatory problems, these behaviors aren’t pervasive or chronic.
They usually begin at a certain age — third grade or middle school — and seem to occur in certain settings, such as the classroom or when doing homework.
They’re often caused by frustrations and failures a child has experienced before his or her ADHD was diagnosed.
Some kids deal with emotional pain by externalizing their problems.
They blame others and take no responsibility for their behaviors.
This syndrome is called oppositional defiant disorder or, when it’s more severe, conduct disorder.
Some children keep the pain inside and have a poor self-image.
They might show clinical evidence of anxiety or a mood disorder.
Course of action: Seek a consultation with a mental health professional, preferably one who is familiar with ADHD.
Treatment often requires that the child work with a therapist, along with his parents and siblings.
[Screener: Could Your Child Have Symptoms of Oppositional Defiant Disorder?]
Social Skills Problems
If the child acted oddly or inappropriately with friends or schoolmates before he received treatment for ADHD, it’s often hard for his peers to shake that image of him.
The child might need help relearning social skills.
For others, difficulty in relating to peers may have other causes, which should be both explored and diagnosed.
Course of action: Once again, seek a consultation with a mental health professional familiar with ADHD.
Interventions might include counseling, group therapy, or participation in a group that focuses on teaching social skills.
The school counselor can often play a significant role in these interventions.
Family Problems
Parents of a child with ADHD symptoms may be overwhelmed by managing their child’s behavior or conflicted about a course of action.
The stress often causes marital problems that may adversely affect a child.
Course of action: Seek a mental health professional who specializes in marital or family counseling.
Diagnosing ADHD
Make sure that your physician takes a thorough history of your child before making a diagnosis.
This will be crucial when distinguishing between ADHD and an ADHD comorbidity.
Here are some guidelines to keep in mind when talking with the doctor and before starting a course of ADHD medication:
Symptoms and behaviors due to anxiety or a mood disorder — not ADHD — start at a specific time or occur only in certain circumstances.
Symptoms caused by ADHD are chronic and pervasive.
You probably would have noted his or her behavior since preschool.
A diagnosis of ADHD requires three steps: 1) showing that the behaviors exist; 2) showing that they have existed since at least age six ; and 3) showing that they occur in two or more life situations (home, school, work, relationships).
[When It’s More Than ADHD: A Guide to Related Conditions]
PMQs: Boris Johnson urged to introduce vitamin D treatment
This vital vitamin is synthesised when the sun's rays land on exposed skin – even for as little as five to 10 minutes – and through the window doesn't count.
Without adequate amounts of vitamin D, problems can occur.
Clumsiness might seem like an innocuous character trait, but it might be a sign of a vitamin D deficiency.
One of the most telling signs of a vitamin D deficiency is experiencing fatigue, as confirmed by the Cleveland Clinic.
READ MORE High cholesterol symptoms: The warning sign in your mouth The Department of Health noted "impaired hand-to-eye coordination" is one indication of fatigue.
Examples include performing poorly in sports, such as tennis or catching a ball, or dropping things.
This can lead to falls, which may lead to broken bones and fractures if vitamin D deficiency has led to osteomalacia.
Osteomalacia Otherwise known as "soft bones", osteomalacia can feel as though your bones are hurting and your muscles are weak.
READ MORE: Apple cider vinegar benefits: Five ways apple cider vinegar could improve your health
Vitamin D deficiency: Could you be affected?
Trending
SUBSCRIBE Invalid email We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you.
This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding.
You can unsubscribe at any time.
Read our Privacy Policy
This is because "fat cells keep vitamin D isolated so that it is not released" into the body.
Other factors include increasing age, as the skin loses its ability to convert the sun's rays into vitamin D.
Even medications can cause a vitamin D deficiency; for example, cholesterol-lowering drugs may reduce vitamin D levels as a side effect.
Other examples include weight-loss drugs, seizure-control drugs, and steroids.
The difference between a vitamin D deficiency and Covid
READ MORE Covid vaccines: Protection from Covid could take a month Aside from fatigue – and all the symptoms that come with it – other possible indications of a vitamin D deficiency include: Muscle aches
Muscle cramps
Mood changes, like depression Signs of fatigue: Chronic tiredness or sleepiness
Headache
Dizziness
Sore or aching muscles
Muscle weakness
Slowed reflexes and responses
Blurry vision A vitamin D deficiency can be diagnosed from a blood serum test ordered by your GP.
Having a quick blood sample taken from your arm can measure your levels of vitamin D.
Vitamin D can be found in oily fish, such as salmon
Millions of people experience brain fog during the menopause with scary symptoms like confusion and forgetfulness — here's why it happens and how it can be treated
Menopause symptoms: What is brain fog, what causes it and how can you treat it?
October marks Menopause Awareness Month, an annual campaign to tackle the stigma surrounding perimenopause and menopause and to raise awareness of the symptoms that women experience.
The theme for this year is cognition and mood, focusing on something that's known as menopause brain fog.
Brain fog is a common symptom experienced by those going through the menopause and it can be debilitating to your daily life.
The symptoms can be scary, with some women even starting to worry that they may have developed dementia.
Luckily, there are ways to combat the tough symptoms that come with brain fog.
We spoke to experts about why it happens and the best way to treat it — here's what they said.
What is brain fog?
Image: Getty) Getty)
Explaining what brain fog is, Dr Hana Patel, GP and Mental Health Coach, told the Mirror: "Brain fog is not one specific symptoms, but rather a collection of symptoms, including confusion, being aware that it takes a long time to think, being forgetful, not finding words, mental tiredness for example.
"
The symptoms of brain fog can include:
Mental fatigue
Forgetfulness
Confusion
Poor concentration
Slow thinking
lost words
As well affecting menopausal women, Dr Patel points out that people who have had Covid or those with anxiety and depression can also suffer from brain fog.
Why does brain fog happen during menopause?
Image: Getty Images/iStockphoto) Getty Images/iStockphoto)
Maria Anderson, a midwife, menopause coach and bestselling author, explained why brain fog occurs during the menopause.
She told the Mirror: "During peri-menopause/menopause there is a reduction in hormones including oestrogen and testosterone.
"These hormones are important for maintaining memory function, concentration and our thinking processes.
When these hormone receptors in the brain are not replenished with adequate levels of oestrogen and testosterone brain fog occurs.
"
Anderson revealed that "millions of women are suffering in silence everyday" because there is still a stigma that needs to be tackled.
She added: "No-one talks about it because they don't want to be seen as incompetent or incapable and so the mask of "I'm Fine' comes out.
It is time to break the silence on all of this.
"
How can you treat brain fog?
Image: Getty Images/Collection Mix: Subjects RF) Getty Images/Collection Mix: Subjects RF)
Maria also revealed that treating brain fog during the menopause is "not a blanket approach" and that they key is finding out specifically which hormone is deficient.
She said: "This can be identified more easily if people understood what hormones are, the impact on their bodies and how they can be controlled.
"
Once you have been able to identify the deficiency Maria says you can then start treatment which could include topping up the deficient hormone "through nutrition" or getting a "specific HRT" prescribed, which is a hormone replacement therapy used to treat the symptoms of menopause.
As well as HRT, Dr Patel also revealed that a staying hydrated and eating a Mediterranean diet can also help to relieve brain fog.
She explained: "Even being a little dehydrated can lead to memory-related issues and poor concentration, so to top up with fluids and water to help with brain fog symptoms.
"A healthy diet is important and helpful with memory loss and protecting again conditions such as dementia, and research shows a mainly Mediterranean diet can be helpful.
"
Dr Patel added that sleep and exercise are also important, saying: "Trying to get enough rest and good quality sleep help with managing memory issues.
Finally carrying out regularly exercise of moderate to high intensity exercise, is a useful way and research demonstrates that this can help in managing brain fog in menopause.
"
If you are worried about symptoms of the menopause, you should see your GP.
Maria advises: "When you visit the GP know your menopause symptoms, be confident, it is your body and only you truly knows how you feel, go with a plan, tell them what you have already done and which symptoms are persisting."
Delaney Nothaft
Special to USA TODAY
Menopause is full of unknowns – such as when the onset might begin and what symptoms to expect.
And when it’s happening in the moment, you aren’t sure if you’re in menopause until you’re really in it.
Many people wonder how long menopause lasts, and while there are averages – it is different for every person.
One of the ways to combat the anxiety around menopause is to understand what might happen to you.
To unravel some of the mystery behind menopause, we spoke to the experts: Dr. Jen Gunter, a San Francisco Bay Area-based board-certified OBGYN and author of "The Menopause Manifesto," Dr. Bryan Jick, MD, FACOG, NCMP, a board-certified OBGYN affiliated with Huntington Hospital in Cedars Sinai, and Dr. Elaine Waetjen, a board-certified OBGYN and Professor in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at UC Davis Health.
What are usually the first signs of menopause?
Generally, the first sign that you may be entering menopause is irregular periods.
You may also start experiencing some of the symptoms commonly associated with menopause like hot flashes and night sweats – but there are over 150 symptoms that are associated with menopause.
Why some doctors shy away from hormone therapy for menopause – and what to know about risks
What are the 3 stages of menopause?
Gunter says from a medical perspective, there are three phases of menopause:
The menopause transition or pre-menopause.
This is the time leading up to your last period when your levels of estrogen begin to drop and symptoms typically begin.
These symptoms can include irregular periods, vaginal dryness, hot flashes, night sweats, irritability, depression, and more.
Menopause, which is defined as one year after your last period.
You can also experience symptoms of the menopause transition in this phase.
Perimenopause is another term that may be used – it refers to the menopause transition and the first year after your last period.
Post-menopause, all of the time in your life after you have experienced menopause.
Gunter says that since you don’t know what day is going to be one year after your last period, this whole sequence is usually generally referred to as “menopause.”
She likes to call it “the menopause continuum.”
How long does menopause last?
It depends on the person.
If you aren’t having any symptoms, it may feel like no time at all – but some people suffer with symptoms for years.
Menopause treatments, explained
So what do the experts want you to know about menopause?
All three physicians responded to this question in similar ways: that estrogen or menopausal hormone therapy is a safe and effective option, but it’s not right for everyone.
Still, there are many things you can do to improve your symptoms.
It depends on the person and really requires the guidance of a physician.
Waetjen explains, “Most often, I hear that menopause is the cause of all symptoms around the time of perimenopause and that hormone therapy is the answer.
It is far more complex than that.
Menopause is a consequence of aging, and aging itself or changes in life circumstances that occur in midlife (children leaving home, parents aging, higher intensity jobs) and the associated stress can contribute to symptoms such as sleep disturbances, mood and weight gain in this time frame.
Additionally, just because a symptom may have some relationship to the hormonal changes of menopause does not mean there is a direct relationship to estrogen and thus is treatable/prevented by taking estrogen.”
Another common theme: watch out for misinformation, particularly when it comes to supplements.
Jick says when it comes to herbal supplements that promise to cure all symptoms, "there's no data to show that they work” so try to avoid getting sucked in.
The experts agree the best thing you can do is reach out to your doctor about your most bothersome symptoms so they can do a proper evaluation and recommend evidence-based treatments.
'Andropause':Some call it menopause for men.
It's controversial and complicated, experts say.
Hormones:Estrogen is one of two major sex hormones in females.
Here's why it matters.
For 30 years, hospitals, insurers and other healthcare providers have sought ways to track patient outcomes to better determine which medical procedures are most effective and which physicians need to show improvement or be weeded out.
Until now, that ability has largely eluded them.
But now, Beverly Grove-based OutcomeMD Inc. is one of a small group of health tech startups aiming to deliver that holy grail of healthcare metrics.
OutcomeMD has developed a software platform that interacts with patients and tracks their symptoms before and after they undergo medical procedures.
In the two years since officially launching the platform, OutcomeMD has been tracking patient symptoms and outcomes for health insurers, hospitals, surgery centers, individual doctor practices and organizations such as the Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Health Care System.
At the center of OutcomeMD’s platform is an ongoing series of assessment questionnaires sent to patients via a mobile phone app, tracking their symptoms before medical procedures or treatments are performed and symptoms and recovery progress for months following the treatment.
The patient responses to those questionnaires are then tabulated to present a picture of how well each patient is recovering.
When patient recoveries are not up to par, the physician is alerted.
“The key to delivering value-based healthcare is generating outcome data,” said Justin Saliman, OutcomeMD’s chief executive.
“But the most detailed outcome data is locked up in the patient’s brain.
That data has to be tapped to quantifiably measure pre-treatment condition and compare in the same way to post-treatment outcome.”
The immediate goal, Saliman said, is to improve the performance of physicians, surgeons and other medical providers.
They can sign up through subscription plans for OutcomeMD’s software tool.
When their patients enter intense symptoms or below-average outcomes into the program, the medical providers are immediately alerted, giving them the chance to intervene to improve the outcomes.
But insurers and larger health provider organizations – especially hospitals – are also keenly interested in this information.
They have strong financial incentives to keep tabs on doctors and surgeons with a track record of below-average outcomes that require hospital readmissions or other costly procedures.
“You are seeing more and more healthcare payors requiring the use of patient-reported outcomes,” said Jason Cole, president and chief science officer for P3 Research Consulting Inc., a Torrance-based healthcare consultancy.
“Physician practices that may sense this change coming are wise to get out in front of this now.
For one thing, it gives them time to improve outcomes before the payor-outcome-reporting mandates kick in.”
This is exactly what Saliman intended when he founded OutcomeMD six years ago.
Saliman, an orthopedic surgeon, said he was working at a healthcare consulting firm that mined data from billing records to try to gauge patient outcomes.
He said he quickly realized that billing records gave a very spotty and incomplete picture of patient outcomes; the more complete picture was through analysis of patient-reported symptoms and progress.
Saliman reached out to physicians that he knew – many from Beverly Grove-based Cedars-Sinai Medical Center – to raise $100,000 to start creating his own patient-reported outcome program that could be used as part of physicians’ treatment programs.
Overcoming doctor reluctance
But a key obstacle was physician reluctance.
“Doctors fear that if they use patient-reported outcomes, they will be punished for having bad outcomes, so they tend to avoid using patient-reported outcomes altogether,” Saliman said.
“Rather, the aim should be to make doctors who have bad outcomes do everything in their power to improve outcomes.”
To achieve this, Saliman and his growing team worked to develop a platform system where doctors can compete on the basis of favorable outcomes.
“The favorable outcome should be the currency: A doctor can say, ‘If I get a good patient outcome, I can market that outcome and therefore, I’m going to try harder in the future to get more good outcomes,’” he said.
That ability to market good patient outcomes is what drew Andy Ball to OutcomeMD’s software program.
Ball is longtime chief executive of Precision Ambulatory Surgery Center near Cedars-Sinai in Beverly Hills.
In 2017, that center merged with three other Beverly Hills surgery centers to form Beverly Hills ASC Venture; Ball also became chief executive of the merged entity.
Cedars-Sinai has since acquired a stake in Beverly Hills ASC Venture.
Ball said that as an independent surgery center, Precision was at a disadvantage compared to hospitals when it came to receiving medical treatment reimbursements from health insurers.
“When we go to payors like Blue Shield or Aetna, we have to show we’re a quality program,” Ball said.
“To do that, we need to demonstrate using long-term data that we are achieving good outcomes.”
Ball said that through his affiliation with Cedars, he became aware of OutcomeMD and in January 2020, became one of the first surgery center executives to sign on.
Ball quickly put OutcomeMD’s new patient reported outcome system as he went to get recognition for his spinal surgery center from the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, or JCAHO.
Up until that point, JCAHO rarely gave accreditations for independent surgery centers.
This past November, Ball said Precision Ambulatory Surgery Center received a “Center for Excellence” designation from JCAHO; he credited the patient-reported outcomes platform from OutcomeMD with helping to secure that designation.
“This is a tremendous boost to physician and patient confidence,” Ball said.
“And I expect it will only help in the next round of negotiations we have with payors.”
Bad outcomes?
But Saliman said trends of bad outcomes are hardly ignored.
Rather, decisions on how to deal with doctors and surgeons with histories of bad patient outcomes are left to that other group of OutcomeMD customers: insurers and other health care payors, as well as hospitals that can use the records to withdraw treating physician status for those with repeated bad outcomes.
This is in addition to giving doctors and surgeons the chance to improve individual patient outcomes that appear headed in the wrong direction.
“We prefer the bad outcomes to be dealt with quietly, behind the scenes,” Saliman said.
Looking ahead, in the short run, Saliman said the company is trying to get on as many electronic medical records systems as possible, either directly or through their marketplaces (similar to Apple Store).
This could help bolster OutcomeMD’s market position as more companies enter the patient-reported outcome sphere.
“Right now, most of the companies that are in this space are focused more on patient-reported outcomes for pharmaceutical companies conducting drug trials,” consultant Cole said.
“But as more health plans require tracking of patient outcomes, more companies will pivot to the commercial side of physician practices.”
Further down the road, Saliman hopes to use all the outcome data his company is collecting to begin measuring medical procedures on a more widespread basis.
“Our data can be aggregated to determine which medical procedures and treatments perform the best and which ones should be discarded,” he said.
Sign up for free to get the latest North East news and updates delivered straight to your inbox
Sign up for free to get the latest North East news and updates delivered straight to your inbox
A dry mouth could be a "red flag" for five serious illnesses, a dentist has warned.
It can often be benign, with less saliva being produced as people grow older, or linked to other issues, like snoring, medication, smoking, or too much alcohol.
However, poor oral health can also be a red flag for serious, and potentially life-threatening, illnesses like diabetes, a stroke and even HIV.
Dr Azad Eyrumlu, of private dental firm Banning Dental Group, said that a persistent dry mouth can often be a sign of something going wrong elsewhere in the body, reports The Mirror.
He said: "A dry mouth can be a sign something’s not right elsewhere.
Read More: Skin cancer symptoms to look out for including vital checklist for mole changes
"This can manifest itself with symptoms such as a sticky feeling in the mouth, a dry or sore throat, difficulty chewing or swallowing or even bad breath.
Certain health conditions such as a stroke, diabetes or Alzheimer’s disease can show themselves in this way, while these symptoms can also be an indicator of an autoimmune disorder such as HIV or Sjogren’s syndrome.
"
Dr Eyrumlu added: "When you visit a dentist, we don’t just look out for your oral health.
We are trained in how to spot certain wider problems with your general health, too.
It’s vital to keep a close eye on your own health and if you do notice persistent symptoms of a dry mouth then you must highlight this with your GP.
Dry mouth could be a red flag for:
Diabetes
Stroke
HIV
Alzheimer's Disease
Sjogren’s syndrome
The condition where our salivary glands fail to produce sufficient saliva to keep the mouth moist is known as Xerostomia.
Whilst we may never consider its importance, our spit plays a key role in our oral health as it helps neutralise acids produced by bacteria and also wash away food particles.
It is also essential to prevent tooth decay, and contains important enzymes that aid the digestive process, ensuring our bodies get the vitamins and nutrients they need.
It’s recommended to see a dentist every six months to make sure your oral hygiene is in good shape and to keep track of any developing problems.
Experts recommend brushing your teeth for two minutes with toothpastes containing fluoride twice a day, as well as regular flossing and the use of mouthwash.
Read Next:
Japan Data
According to a survey conducted by Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare, many were not consulting a doctor despite experiencing suspected menopausal symptoms.
The Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare’s survey on menopausal symptoms in Japan showed that 28.3% of women in their forties, 38.3% in their fifties, and 27.7% in their sixties thought they might have such symptoms.
That said, the percentage of women who had gone to hospital for a consultation and been diagnosed as having symptoms amounted to only 3.6% in their forties, 9.1% in their fifties, and 6.9% in their sixties.
Menopause generally refers to the period of approximately 10 years during which the menstrual cycle ends and, due to a decrease in hormones, various disorders such as hot flashes, palpitations, and irritability can occur.
When respondents who had experienced at least one menopausal symptom were asked about the length of time from when they became aware of such symptoms to when they had a medical consultation, of those who visited a doctor within three months, 9.1% were in their forties, 11.6% were in their fifties, and 9.9% were in their sixties.
The overwhelming majority though had not consulted a doctor, indicating that many may try to get through menopause without seeking medical advice.
Men are also thought to develop symptoms similar to women’s menopausal symptoms after the age of 40 due to a decrease in testosterone, although this has not been fully confirmed.
Looking at the percentage of men who consulted a doctor and were diagnosed as having menopausal symptoms, 1.5% were in their forties, 1.7% were in their fifties, and 0.9% were in their sixties.
Only 8.2% of men in their forties, 14.3% in their fifties, and 13.6% in their sixties thought they may have menopausal symptoms.
The survey targeted people aged from 20 to 64 nationwide and received responses from 5,000 people, comprising 2,975 women and 2,025 men.
(Translated from Japanese.
Banner photo © Pixta.)
Ellen DeGeneres is feeling 100% following a battle with COVID-19.
In a video thanking her supporters and providing an update on her health, the comedian revealed she dealt with a symptom that surprised her.
“One thing they don’t tell you is you get, somehow, excruciating back pain.
Didn’t know that was a symptom,” DeGeneres, 62, said in the clip posted Wednesday on Twitter.
“Who knew?
How come?” she continued.
“Back pain.
Bad.”
Ellen DeGeneres
DeGeneres announced on Dec. 10 that she had tested positive for coronavirus, but was “feeling fine” at the time.
“Anyone who has been in close contact with me has been notified, and I am following all proper CDC guidelines,” she wrote in a Twitter message last week.
“I’ll see you all again after the holidays.
Please stay healthy and safe.”
She wrote last Friday that all of the positive messages she had received were “helping a lot.”
Production of the comedian’s daytime talk show, “The Ellen DeGeneres Show,” will resume in January, according to Variety.
Earlier this year, employees accused the show of having a toxic environment, prompting DeGeneres to apologize to her staff.
Three executive producers are no longer with the show following an investigation.
Psychomotor retardation is a condition characterized by sluggish or diminished body movements, usually accompanied by a slowing of thought processes.
It is also sometimes referred to as psychomotor slowing or psychomotor impairment.
Experiencing psychomotor impairment feels as if a dial has been turned back, putting you on slow speed.
The physical manifestations of psychomotor impairment vary in scope and severity, but are usually obvious to both loved ones and healthcare professionals.
Psychomotor retardation occurs commonly during depressive episodes of bipolar disorder, as well as during major depressive disorder.
In these circumstances, the effects are usually temporary and recede as the depression lifts.
That said, the development of psychomotor retardation does not always signal a depressive episode.
Other situations and conditions, such as drug side effects and certain medical conditions, can also trigger slowed physical and mental activity.
Symptoms of Psychomotor Retardation
People with psychomotor retardation move, speak, react, and often think more slowly than normal.
This can manifest in a variety of ways, largely depending on the severity of the impairment.
Delayed responsiveness and difficulty following another person's conversation are common.
Complex mental processes—such as calculating a tip or mapping out directions—take longer to accomplish.
Common examples of physical impairment include:
Sluggishness when walking or changing positions, such as when getting up from a chair
or changing positions, such as when getting up from a chair Impaired ability to perform tasks requiring eye-hand coordination, such as catching a ball, shaving, and applying makeup
requiring eye-hand coordination, such as catching a ball, shaving, and applying makeup Reacting to situations slowly , such as when reaching for a falling object
, such as when reaching for a falling object Diminished facility with fine motor tasks , such as writing, using scissors, and tying shoelaces
, such as writing, using scissors, and tying shoelaces Slumping when standing and having poor posture
and having poor posture Speaking in a soft, monotonous voice
Speaking noticeably more quietly , or speech that is punctuated by long pauses or lost trains of thought
, or speech that is punctuated by long pauses or lost trains of thought Staring into space and reduced eye contact
A person with severe psychomotor retardation may appear catatonic.
In this state, the person does not respond normally to others or the environment.
Catatonia is a medical emergency as it can become life-threatening.
Diagnosis
Psychomotor retardation isn't a diagnosis in and of itself.
Instead, it is a symptom of major depressive disorder.
That said, the extent of psychomotor retardation may help healthcare providers better understand how many depressive episodes have been experienced.
To identify psychomotor retardation severity, a healthcare provider will likely look at the person's:
Bodily movements
Eye movements
Facial expressions
Posture
Self-touching actions
Speech patterns
If you have psychomotor impairment without depression or bipolar disorder, a healthcare provider will investigate other causes for the condition, such as a reaction to a medication.
Causes of Psychomotor Retardation
The slowed mental and physical activity associated with psychomotor impairment occurs most frequently in people experiencing a depressive episode due to either major depression or bipolar disorder, potentially by disturbing the brain's white matter.
The degree of physical and mental blunting often correlates to the severity of the depressive episode.
Other psychiatric disorders sometimes associated with psychomotor retardation include:
Psychomotor impairment is also sometimes present with substance abuse.
Nervous system diseases and other conditions might cause blunted or slow physical and mental activity as well, including:
Certain genetic conditions, such as Huntington's disease
Dementia
Hypothyroidism
Medication side effects, especially with psychiatric medicines
Parkinson's disease and related conditions
A person's age and sex can also influence the prevalence and extent of psychomotor slowness.
Treatment
Several steps can be taken to help treat psychomotor slowing.
Medication
Reviewing current medications is one of the first steps in addressing psychomotor retardation.
This is important to determine whether medication side effects might be triggering the physical and mental slowness.
Certain anti-anxiety drugs and antipsychotic medications commonly prescribed for bipolar disorder are possible culprits.
If current medication side effects are not the cause, and other potential causes have been ruled out, prescribing a new medication is typically the first line of defense in treating psychomotor impairment associated with a depressive episode.
Common medication options for people with bipolar disorder who are experiencing a depressive episode include Abilify (aripiprazole), Depakote (valproic acid), Lamictal (lamotrigine), Latuda (lurasidone), lithium, Seroquel (quetiapine), and Zyprexa (olanzapine).
The choice of medication or combination of medicines is made on an individual basis.
Current and past medications, and an individual's response to them, are important considerations in drug treatment decisions.
Other Treatment Options
Once the right combination of medications is found, psychotherapy and other non-medical therapies may be used in addition to medication to support long-term mood stabilization.
With severe depression, especially if accompanied by catatonia, loss of touch with reality, or a high risk of suicide, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be an option.
While it is one of the fastest and most effective ways to treat bipolar depression, ECT is generally undertaken only if other treatment options fail.
If you are having suicidal thoughts, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 988 for support and assistance from a trained counselor.
If you or a loved one are in immediate danger, call 911.
For more mental health resources, see our National Helpline Database.
Coping With Psychomotor Retardation
In addition to medication and other treatment options, there are a few things you can do to better cope with psychomotor slowness.
Identify potential triggers : Is there a certain time of day or a particular situation in which psychomotor impairment is worse?
Knowing this can help you plan your day in a way that reduces the effects.
: Is there a certain time of day or a particular situation in which psychomotor impairment is worse?
Knowing this can help you plan your day in a way that reduces the effects.
Keep working on your skills : If certain actions or skills are slowed, continuing to practice them may help reduce the slowness.
At a minimum, you can look for ways to work around the impairment (such as wearing slip-on shoes instead of shoes with laces, if shoe-tying is difficult).
: If certain actions or skills are slowed, continuing to practice them may help reduce the slowness.
At a minimum, you can look for ways to work around the impairment (such as wearing slip-on shoes instead of shoes with laces, if shoe-tying is difficult).
Offer yourself some grace: With proper treatment, psychomotor retardation can improve over time.
Until then, be kind to yourself.
While you may not resolve this issue overnight, what matters most is that you are working toward feeling better.
Progress is progress, so try not to let your psychomotor impairment bring you down.
Print this page
Covid-19 has left many patients with debilitating, varied symptoms months after the initial infection has cleared, raising fears about the long-term health costs of the pandemic.
Patients infected in the first wave of the virus have continued to suffer disorders in the brain, lungs, heart, gut, liver, skin and other parts of the body, according to a new review of the disease conducted by the UK National Institute for Health Research.
Some of the symptoms of Long Covid, as the condition is often known, can be seriously debilitating, like “brain fog” and extreme exhaustion.
Other consequences are milder, such as hair loss and the inability to taste or smell.
“A common theme is that symptoms arise in one physiological system then abate, only for symptoms to arise in a different system,” the NIHR report said.
The review aims to increase awareness of the condition among health workers, while stimulating further research since so little is known today about the prevalence or the causes of Long Covid.
Data from King’s College London’s Covid Symptom Study app, with 4m regular contributors, suggests that up to 20 per cent of infections lead to complications lasting longer than a month © Oli Scarff/AFP via Getty
A study in Italy found that 87 per cent of people discharged from a Rome hospital were still experiencing at least one symptom two months after the onset of Covid-19.
At least 55 per cent had three or more symptoms including fatigue, breathing difficulties and pain in joints and chest.
Public Health England said last month that around 10 per cent of ‘mild’ Covid-19 cases who were not admitted to hospital reported symptoms lasting more than four weeks.
A separate study by King’s College London, using data from its Covid Symptom Study app with 4m regular contributors, suggested that between 10 per cent and 20 per cent of infections led to complications lasting longer than a month.
If around 10 per cent of people with confirmed Covid-19 will suffer from Long Covid, that would mean more than 3.8m people worldwide and more than 65,000 patients in the UK.
But the NIHR researchers said it was too soon to give a reliable estimate of prevalence.
“The overwhelming message is that this is not a linear condition,” said Elaine Maxwell, lead author of the NIHR report.
“Many [patients] suffer a rollercoaster of symptoms moving around the body, from which they do not recover.”
Latest coronavirus news Follow FT's live coverage and analysis of the global pandemic and the rapidly evolving economic crisis here.
There are some parallels between Covid-19 today and the start of the Aids epidemic in the 1980s, according to Philip Pearson, a respiratory physician at Northampton General Hospital and a member of the NIHR study group.
“As we understood HIV infection better, we found out about all the different possible presentations of disease.”
he said.
“Right now, as we try to define our terms, this feels like HIV research was then.”
Long Covid’s wide and fluctuating range of symptoms suggested that it was the result of several overlapping but different syndromes, including postviral fatigue and permanent organ damage, the NIHR report said.
“It feels as if this coronavirus is behaving quite differently to other viral infections like flu,” Dr Pearson added
Despite all the uncertainties, the NIHR authors called for a working definition of Long Covid to be agreed as soon as possible.
“The absence of a definition may impact the ability of patients to have their symptoms and experiences properly recognised and treated by healthcare services, which can in turn have a further psychological impact, especially for non-hospitalised patients who were never formally diagnosed.”
In reaction to growing concerns about Long Covid, the UK’s NHS last week committed £10m to set up a regional network of Long Covid clinics to assess patients’ physical, cognitive and psychological condition and, if appropriate, refer them for specialist treatment.
Schizophrenia is a severe psychiatric disorder with complex cognitive and behavioral symptoms caused by genetic and/or environmental factors affecting certain brain areas and circuits, resulting in disrupted brain development [1].
It is characterized by symptoms of delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, disorganized behavior, and negative symptoms [2, 3].
Negative symptoms refer to a diminution or absence of normal behaviors related to motivation and interest or expression
[4].
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), approximately 24 million people, or 1 in 300 persons, are affected with schizophrenia globally
[5].
Schizophrenia is particularly prevalent in young adults between 20 and 30 years of age and leads to disability in about half of the patients [3].
Several propositions have been made for the mechanisms by which cumulative adversity confers psychosis risk, including the suggestion that exposures create vulnerability to psychotic experience through toxic effects on biological, cognitive, and affective systems, which in turn may be amplified by additive environmental stressors over time [6].
Schizophrenia has a multifactorial etiology, with complex gene–environment interactions leading to the emergence and progression of psychotic symptoms [7].
In particular, early-life environmental risk factors have proven to play a major role in altering neurodevelopmental trajectories, and in turn, contributing to the development of prodromal symptoms in predisposed individuals [8].
One of the environmental factors is trauma experiences across the lifespan, especially during childhood and adolescence [9, 10].
A previous meta-analysis found that traumas in childhood may lead to hallucinations and delusions within psychotic disorders
[11].
This meta-analysis revealed that among individuals with psychosis, childhood trauma was significantly correlated with the severity of hallucinations and delusions [11].
The relationship between traumatic experiences and positive psychotic symptoms
Stressful or traumatic events experienced in childhood or adolescence have a lifelong impact on mental and physical health [12].
Exposure to traumatic events is associated with posttraumatic stress and other common childhood emotional and behavioral problems.
Extensive literature links childhood trauma, particularly maltreatment, to adult psychopathology and impairment
[13].
Childhood trauma can be assumed to be a severe form of stress that renders individuals more vulnerable to developing schizophrenia
[3].
Patients with schizophrenia have been shown to experience a higher prevalence of traumatic experiences than patients with the affective disorder
[14] and healthy individuals from the general population [15].
There is strong evidence from a meta-analysis of patient-control, prospective, cross-section,al and cohort studies that exposure to traumatic events and experiences is associated with an increased risk for psychosis in adulthood [16].
Beyond being predictive of the later development of schizophrenia in healthy individuals [9, 10], being exposed to trauma has also been associated with poorer physical and mental health and functional disability in the general population [17] and patients with schizophrenia
[18, 19].
Morrison et al. have explored the association between psychosis and trauma [20].
They found that there was a very high prevalence of exposure to traumatic life events in people with psychosis [20].
In addition, the severity of trauma was associated with the severity of both PTSD and psychotic symptoms in people with psychosis [20].
Despite these data, the nature and mechanisms underlying the relationship between trauma exposure and psychotic symptoms need further investigation [21].
Also, traumatic experiences have been linked to various mental disorders such as depression [22], bipolar disorders [23], eating disorders [24], borderline personality disorder [25], and substance-related disorders
[26].
Trauma is thus far from being specifically involved in the etiology of psychotic disorders, which further complicates our understanding of the pathways leading from trauma to psychosis.
Hence, a strong need for further exploring the relationship and possible mediators between traumatic experiences and psychotic symptoms in patients with schizophrenia.
Potential mediators on the association between lifetime traumatic experiences and positive psychotic symptoms
To better understand the interplay between lifetime traumatic experiences and positive psychotic symptoms, we theoretically hypothesized three sets of variables as mediators in this relationship: (1) cognitive impairment, (2) insomnia, and (3) psychological factors (i.e., depression, anxiety, distress, and fear of COVID-19) as shown in fig.
1.
Fig.
1 Conceptual framework of the association between lifetime traumatic experiences and positive psychosis symptoms, while considering cognitive impairment, insomnia, and psychological factors as mediators [27] Full size image
The choice of the cognitive factor was based on Morrison’s integrative cognitive approach, which suggests that experiencing trauma at any age can alter a child’s or adult’s attributional style, fostering negative beliefs about the self, the world, and others [28].
In the wake of trauma, adolescents often consider themselves vulnerable, others untrustworthy, and the world as dangerous and unsafe.
These negative belief structures can alter attributional styles, making paranoid, distressing interpretations of ambiguous events more likely [10].
Up to 75% of people with schizophrenia have significant cognitive deficits which are often the first signs of schizophrenia
[29].
In general, schizophrenia patients experience impairments in a wide range of cognitive processes, including memory, attention, motor skills, executive function, and social cognition [30].
Cognitive impairment is highly prevalent in schizophrenia, possibly because both psychotic symptoms and impaired cognition share similar etiology – genetic and/or environmental features [31].
Accordingly, physical or emotional trauma during childhood may cause cognitive impairment and increase the risk of developing schizophrenia or other mental disorders later in life [32].
Childhood maltreatment and neglect are known to have a detrimental impact on the cognitive functioning of patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
[33].
Childhood neglect was a predictor of impaired social cognition and poorer verbal learning in patients with first-episode schizophrenia
[34].
At the same time, cognitive impairment (e.g., large errors in memory) has been found to be associated with higher levels of positive symptom s[35].
Based on literature data, we also propose the hypothesis that insomnia may represent a mediator underlying the relationship between trauma experiences and positive psychotic symptoms.
Insomnia is common in patients with schizophrenia and has been suggested as a risk factor for psychotic symptoms emergence and exacerbation
[36, 37].
Research found that the presence of sleep disturbance, especially clinically significant insomnia, likely worsens clinical outcomes for patients with schizophrenia [38].
Evidence also supported that psychotic symptoms and experiences tend to exacerbate as a result of sleep disturbances in clinical
[36, 39] and non-clinical populations [40].
Sleep is generally impacted both immediately following a trauma and in the long-term with affected sleep domains including nightmares, fragmented sleep, initial insomnia, fatigue, sensations at night, light sleep, and night anxiety.
These effects on normal sleep processes are considered one of the most frequent and distressing complaints following a traumatic event [41].
In addition, longitudinal studies indicate that sleep disruption, before and following trauma exposure leads to exacerbation of subsequent trauma-related distress, specifically for those with pre-existing insomnia
[42].
In terms of psychological variables, our choice of fear of COVID-19 as a mediator was motivated by the increasing amount of evidence that the pandemic substantially affected people with schizophrenia and has even been shown to contribute to the emergence of de novo psychotic symptoms
[43].
Patients with schizophrenia are postulated to be at a higher risk of acquiring COVID-19 and having a poorer health outcome and this can be due to the symptoms of this disease as delusions, hallucinations, disorganized behavior, cognitive impairment, and impaired insight
[44, 45].
Moreover, increased attention has been given to psychotic symptoms as they occur in patients infected with COVID-19 without any psychiatric disorders, putting patients with schizophrenia at high risk [46].
At the same time, individuals who experienced childhood trauma have been demonstrated to exhibit high levels of COVID-19-related fear [47].
On the other hand, psychological distress can also mediate the association between trauma and psychosis in schizophrenia.
There is sufficient evidence that traumatic experiences are linked to the development of depression, anxiety, and distress later in life [48,49,50].
Hartley’s systematic review explored the influence of anxiety and depression on positive psychotic symptoms and if those variables were the cause of the emergence and persistence of the psychosis.
They found that both anxiety and depression are associated in meaningful ways with the severity of delusions and hallucinations, the distress they elicit, and their content [51].
The cross-sectional nature of the majority of studies and the focus on certain symptom subtypes couldn’t reveal the causality of this association between anxiety, depression, and psychosis.
However, the findings of this systemic review may imply that anxiety and depression could be targets for therapeutic intervention [51].
Findings relevant to the severity of psychotic experiences have demonstrated that anxiety is related to levels of paranoia, and delusions and can trigger acute augmentation in auditory hallucinations [26].
Another research showed that the severity of positive psychotic symptoms is significantly associated with increased severity of anxiety symptoms
[52].
Moreover, depression was significantly associated with symptom severity in both chronic and early psychosis groups [26].
Mood instability and affective dysregulation are highly prevalent in patients with schizophrenia and have been suggested to give rise to psychotic symptoms
[53].
The present study
Schizophrenia remains a chronic debilitating disorder, and its management can be challenging.
Positive symptoms of schizophrenia can be a result of many factors that could worsen the outcome and quality of life of patients [54].
Establishing the role of lifetime traumatic experiences in psychotic disorders is the first step in anticipating and eventually mitigating the adulthood development of these life-altering disorders.
Not to forget the role of culture in severe mental illnesses such as schizophrenia which requires adequate attention and continued research [55].
An anterior Lebanese study aimed to delineate psychotic symptoms with sexual content, along with their relationships with the severity of schizophrenia symptoms and childhood abusive events [56].
They found that 36.5 and 50.3% of the participants screened positive for current and lifetime episodes of sexual delusions and/or hallucinations, respectively [56].
Another cross-sectional study examined a sample of Lebanese patients with schizophrenia to identify clinical risk factors for aggressiveness including child abuse.
They found that higher physical and sexual abuse, alcohol drinking, having a history of head trauma, and male gender were significantly associated with higher mean aggression scores
[57].
Thus, studying the factors that may affect positive symptoms of schizophrenia among the Lebanese population is crucial to provide better ways of treatment.
Therefore, our principal objective was to assess the relationship between lifetime traumatic experiences and positive psychotic symptoms, along with the mediation effect of cognitive impairment, insomnia, and psychological factors among Lebanese patients with schizophrenia.
Chances are, you've probably burned out before you even realized it.
Burnout is not a new phenomenon: The term was first coined in the 1970s to describe the exhaustion workers felt from their jobs, but it wasn't until three years ago that the World Health Organization officially recognized it as an occupational phenomenon resulting from "chronic workplace stress that has not been successfully managed.
"
Still, burnout can manifest as a myriad of symptoms, and not all of them are obvious, Dr. Wendy Suzuki, a neuroscientist at New York University, tells CNBC Make It.
"You might feel constantly worried, angry or just really, really tired," she explains.
"There's a whole gamut of negative emotions and physical symptoms of burnout.
"
The World Health Organization counts exhaustion, cynicism and reduced productivity as some of the most common symptoms of burnout.
But there are three early signs of burnout you may be missing, according to Suzuki:
Procrastination
Constant distraction
Apathy
It's normal to have some procrastination tendencies — but if you're taking longer than usual to get things done at work, it could mean you're under a lot of pressure, and your brain is not coping well with the continuous stress, or that you have become disengaged with the work you're doing and hit a wall, Suzuki points out.
"We're all still recovering from the extreme changes to work and school over the last two-plus years," she adds.
Struggling with constant distractions at work is another hidden sign that you're headed for burnout.
Past research has shown that burnout can alter the circuits in your brain and make it harder to focus, making it harder to ignore workplace disruptions and stay on task.
Apathy is one of the "biggest" and most misunderstood symptoms of burnout, Suzuki says.
"You don't have to be feeling these visceral, negative emotions to feel burned out," she explains.
"You can also have an attitude of 'I don't care anymore' toward things you used to care about, like your job."
Apathy can also appear as a lack of motivation, or a pervasive feeling of numbness, she adds — like nothing you do matters.
One of the most critical steps to curbing burnout is becoming more self-aware of what triggers your negative emotions, such as anger, sadness or fear, and recognizing when they appear instead of suppressing them, Suzuki says.
Next time you're feeling stressed, anxious or a different negative emotion, Suzuki suggests asking yourself, "Where is this feeling coming from, and why is it coming up now?"
"Getting more in touch with a wider range of emotions is very, very important because if we hide them in the basement, so to speak, for too long, they'll just get worse and eventually they will escape and be unmanageable," she says.
Suzuki also recommends finding a therapist or a certified mental health counselor who can help you connect the dots between your symptoms and the root cause of the burnout you might be experiencing, as well as help you craft a plan of action to manage your burnout.
Want to earn more and work less?
Register for the free CNBC Make It: Your Money virtual event on Dec. 13 at 12 p.m. ET to learn from money masters like Kevin O'Leary how you can increase your earning power.
Sign up now: Get smarter about your money and career with our weekly newsletter
Speaking to Holly and Phill, Dr Sarra advised regularly checking under your nails for a sign of skin cancer.
"Marks under your nails could be a melanoma," warned Dr Sarra.
As she explained, the mark usually looks like a pigmented lesion.
A pigmented lesion is a dark spot under the nail bed, said Dr Sarra.
READ MORE: Skin cancer warning: Mum warns of sunbeds use after being diagnosed with disease
Statement Highlights:
A new American Heart Association scientific statement provides an updated roadmap for incorporating patient-reported symptoms and quality of life assessments into routine care for people with peripheral artery disease (PAD or clogged leg arteries).
Patient-reported outcomes measures (PROMs) are systematic and validated ways of asking individuals with PAD to assess their symptoms and to share how their functioning (physical, social and emotional) and their quality of life are affected.
PROMs have been used as important endpoints for clinical trials evaluating PAD treatments.
According to the new statement, PROMs may also be used to evaluate the quality of programs providing ongoing care for people with PAD.
Embargoed until 4 a.m. CT / 5 a.m. ET Thursday, October 13, 2022
DALLAS, October 13, 2022 — For the approximately 8.5 million people in the U.S. living with peripheral artery disease (PAD – pronounced P-A-D), which is narrowed or clogged arteries in the legs, treatment decisions and criteria for success should be led by their symptoms and self-reported quality of life, according to a new American Heart Association scientific statement published today in the Association’s flagship, peer-reviewed journal Circulation.
An American Heart Association scientific statement is an expert analysis of current research and may inform future treatment guidelines.
The statement, “Advancing peripheral artery disease quality of care and outcomes through patient-reported health status assessment,” highlights how managing PAD based on a person’s experience of symptoms can lead to more patient-centered care and outcomes, with a focus on high-value care, compared to relying on clinical measures like the speed of blood flow to the legs or artery diameter.
“The person living with peripheral artery disease is the authority on the impact it has on their daily life.
Our treatment must be grounded in their lived experiences and go beyond the clinical measures of how well blood flows through the arteries,” said Vice Chair and lead author of the statement writing group Kim G. Smolderen, Ph.D., a clinical psychologist and an associate professor of medicine and psychiatry and co-director of the Vascular Medicine Outcomes Research (VAMOS) lab at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut.
“We have spent years developing and validating standardized instruments to capture people’s experiences in a reliable and sensitive way.
We are now at a point where we can start integrating this information into real-world care, through pilot programs that can develop quality benchmarks for different phenotypes of patients with PAD and the types of treatments they undergo, as seen from their perspective.”
Painful Legs and Other Patient Experiences
While the majority of people living with peripheral artery disease are older than age 40, PAD does occur in younger individuals as well.
People with PAD have blockages in the arteries supplying blood to their legs and feet, often creating pain, cramping or weakness when they walk that makes it necessary to stop and rest temporarily until the pain subsides.
Some people experience no symptoms; however, many patients might remain pain-free only because they limit their activities.
Studies show that their health status and functioning is also impacted.
People with severely limited blood flow to the legs (called critical limb ischemia) may experience pain even when resting, fail to heal when they sustain a wound or develop gangrene that may lead to amputation.
PAD is also a risk factor for heart attack or stroke.
“All of these manifestations have a tremendous impact on people’s daily functioning and quality of life, with more impact as the severity of the disease increases.
Outcomes are also affected by other health conditions common among people with PAD, such as Type 2 diabetes, coronary artery disease, kidney dysfunction or mental health conditions like depression or stress-related disorders,” said Smolderen.
Patient-led Treatment
When the health care team has an increased awareness and recognition of the burden of disease on quality of life, coordination of care for risk factors and patient concerns are at the forefront.
The statement advocates for improving and individualizing the care of people with clogged leg arteries by gathering feedback from their experience throughout treatment.
Patient-reported outcomes measures (PROMs) are systematic and validated ways of asking patients directly to assess how their disease impacts their symptoms, their functioning (physical, social and emotional) and their quality of life.
Feedback through PROMs can more reliably and objectively assess quality of care for people with PAD.
Key benefits of using PROMs include:
improving understanding of the patient’s lived experience with PAD;
improving patient’s self-management of symptoms and medical needs;
standardizing quality performance benchmarks for practices that care for people with PAD; and
providing relevant feedback to determine treatment changes or needs.
Engaging patients as the expert on their own experiences calls greater attention to quality-of-life concerns or cardiovascular risk factors, which may help clinicians think beyond a particular intervention.
This perspective may lead to conversations that shift treatment or connect patients with other resources such as behavioral health services, wound care or smoking cessation.
Patient-centered care may also enhance self-management and shared decision-making between patients and clinicians.
All of these benefits are possible as long as the patient-reported outcomes measures are assessed using tools that the patient understands regardless of literacy level, language barriers and cultural norms.
It’s also important that PROMs are conducted by experts who have the qualifications and understanding to administer the tools, interpret the findings and connect patients with additional resources.
The statement includes examples of PROMs to measure leg pain and functioning (including walking impairment), PAD-specific health status, general health status and depressive symptoms.
Performance Measures to Improve Quality of Care
PROMs may also become an integral part of assessing whether programs are providing quality care for people with PAD.
Spurred by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and the National Quality Forum, PROMs are increasingly being integrated into definitions of what it means to deliver patient-centered ,high-quality clinical care, and PROMs scores may directly impact reimbursement.
To evaluate programs, PROMs are translated into Patient-Reported Outcomes Performance Measures (PRO-PMs).
The use of PRO-PMs has the potential to:
provide measurable goals for programs to enhance their quality of care;
encourage the development of training and expertise for health systems to administer, interpret and ethically use PRO-PMs to improve patient care;
reduce disparities in care and promote health equity; and
aid in the creation of national standards for quality care.
“This roadmap highlights a paradigm shift that places the patient experience front and center, which is a departure from the status quo.
It is provocative to now place the lived experience with the disease at the forefront, engaging people with PAD to provide information that holds health systems and practitioners accountable as to whether high-quality care was delivered, in addition to assessing the safe and effective delivery of current evidence-based treatments,” said Smolderen.
This scientific statement was prepared by the volunteer writing group on behalf of the American Heart Association’s Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease and the Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health.
The writing group includes a patient advocate and experts in clinical psychology, outcomes research, nursing, cardiology, vascular surgery and vascular medicine.
It was important to ensure this statement embodied the interdisciplinary nature of PAD care and the dedication to innovating the vascular space, across vascular specialties.
This meant including experts with experience both on the research end with PROs and the clinical experience with PAD, as well as with pioneers in the space of patient reported outcomes for cardiovascular populations and with direct input from patient advocates.
American Heart Association scientific statements promote greater awareness about cardiovascular diseases and stroke issues and help facilitate informed health care decisions.
Scientific statements outline what is currently known about a topic and what areas need additional research.
While scientific statements inform the development of guidelines, they do not make treatment recommendations.
American Heart Association guidelines provide the Association’s official clinical practice recommendations.
Co-authors are Chair Carole Decker, Ph.D., R.N.; Olamide Alabi, M.D.; Tracie C. Collins, M.D., M.P.H., M.S.; Bernard P. Dennis, B.A.; Philip P. Goodney, M.D.; Carlos Mena-Hurtado, M.D.; and John A. Spertus, M.D., M.P.H. Authors’ disclosures are listed in the manuscript.
The Association receives funding primarily from individuals.
Foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific Association programs and events.
The Association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content.
Revenues from pharmaceutical and biotech companies, device manufacturers and health insurance providers, and the Association’s overall financial information are available here.
Additional Resources:
About the American Heart Association
The American Heart Association is a relentless force for a world of longer, healthier lives.
We are dedicated to ensuring equitable health in all communities.
Through collaboration with numerous organizations, and powered by millions of volunteers, we fund innovative research, advocate for the public’s health and share lifesaving resources.
The Dallas-based organization has been a leading source of health information for nearly a century.
Connect with us on heart.org, Facebook, Twitter or by calling 1-800-AHA-USA1.
###
For Media Inquiries: 214-706-1173
Suzette Harris: 214-706-1207; suzette.harris@heart.org
For Public Inquiries: 1-800-AHA-USA1 (242-8721)
heart.org and stroke.org
Uterine cancer is one of the most common forms of cancer, most often affecting cisgender women who are middle-aged or older.
In 2022, there were about 67,000 new cases diagnosed, making up about three percent of all cancer diagnoses for the year.
These statistics make uterine cancer the ninth most common type of cancer in 2022 (breast cancer is the most common).
Types of Uterine Cancer
Uterine cancer—technically cancer originating in the uterus—can be separated into two distinct types: the more common endometrial cancer and the less common uterine sarcoma.
Endometrial Cancer
Endometrial cancer forms in the endometrium, or the cells that line the uterus (that's what sheds each month during menstruation).
This cancer is most common in people who have gone through menopause, with 60 being the average age of diagnosis.
Risk factors for endometrial cancer include:
Exposure to estrogen through things such as early menstruation, estrogen-only hormone therapy, late menopause, and never being pregnant
Endometrial hyperplasia, which is an abnormal thickening of the endometrium
Using tamoxifen, a selective estrogen receptor modulator used to treat breast cancer, for more than two years
Obesity, weight gain, and diabetes
Genetic factors like inheriting Lynch syndrome, a condition that increases the risk of developing certain cancers
One study published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute in 2022 also found a link between uterine cancer and the use of chemical hair straighteners.
On the flip side, things such as breastfeeding, exercising, and taking birth control pills that combine estrogen and progestin can decrease the risk of endometrial cancer.
Oddly, smoking cigarettes can also protect against uterine cancer, but the harms of smoking outweigh this benefit.
Uterine Sarcoma
Uterine sarcoma is much rarer, primarily affecting the uterus's muscles or supporting tissues.
Risk factors for uterine sarcoma include past use of radiation therapy to the pelvis and taking tamoxifen.
Adobe Stock - Design: Alex Sandoval
Uterine Cancer Symptoms
Both types of uterine cancer can display similar symptoms, but before we dive in, there's something important to remember: These symptoms can be a sign of endometrial cancer or uterine sarcoma, but they may also be a sign of a number of other far less dangerous conditions, Ursula Matulonis, MD, chief of the division of gynecologic oncology at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, told Health.
That means that having any of these symptoms doesn't automatically mean you have uterine cancer; it just suggests that it's time to make an appointment with your ob-gyn.
Uterine cancer differs from some other cancers in that you can have symptoms at very early stages of the disease, making it especially critical to be seen by a healthcare provider when you notice symptoms.
Here, gynecologic oncologists explain seven of the most common symptoms associated with uterine cancer and why it's essential to get them checked out by a medical provider ASAP.
Irregular Vaginal Bleeding or Discharge
Irregular vaginal bleeding is the most common symptom of early-stage uterine cancer or uterine cancer that hasn't yet spread to other areas of the body, Pamela Soliman, MD, professor, and center medical director in the Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine at MD Anderson Cancer Center in Texas, told Health.
About 90% of women with endometrial cancer report this symptom.
This bleeding occurs when cancer grows on the uterine lining, causing it to thicken.
That thickening triggers the cells at the top of the uterine lining to slough off irregularly, Dr. Soliman explained.
Unusual bleeding might occur:
In between periods
During your period
After you've already gone through menopause
Depending on when you experience it, the irregular bleeding may look like spotting, or it might be heavier.
It might look red or appear like a brownish discharge, Dr. Matulonis said.
In a small number of endometrial cancer and uterine sarcoma diagnoses, there may be no visible blood in the discharge.
Irregular vaginal bleeding is much more likely to be a sign of cancer after menopause than before it, according to Dr. Soliman.
"In a postmenopausal woman, that's definitely a red flag," said Dr. Soliman.
Still, anyone with irregular bleeding or discharge should raise the issue with a healthcare provider.
Pelvic Pain
Uterine cancer can cause pelvic pain in certain circumstances, like when cancer gets big enough that it compresses nearby structures and nerves that surround the uterus, according to Alison Schram, MD, attending physician in the early drug development and gynecologic medical oncology services at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York, told Health.
Pain can also occur when cancer spreads beyond the uterus and into the pelvis or abdomen.
In some cases, this spread can lead to fluid build-up in the pelvis or abdomen, which can, in turn, trigger discomfort, Dr. Schram said.
In some cases, the body recognizes a tumor in the uterus as abnormal and starts to cramp up in an effort to dispel it, Dr. Soliman explained.
Pain from uterine cancer can be continuous, or it can come and go.
It may even come on during vaginal sex if there's external pressure put on a mass in the uterus due to intercourse.
The severity of this pelvic pain, however, isn't uniform: Some patients may feel more discomfort than actual pain, said Dr. Matulonis; others might feel a sharper kind of pain.
Bloating
Bloating is a much more common symptom for ovarian cancer than uterine cancer, but it can occur in either cancer type, said Dr. Schram.
It most often occurs in people whose cancer has spread from the uterus to the abdomen.
This causes fluid to build up in the abdomen, called ascites.
People with ascites may also have hard, swollen bellies.
Sometimes when the cancer mass is large enough, its presence alone can cause subjective bloating, Dr. Schram added.
Gastrointestinal Issues
Tummy issues most often occur in more advanced stages of uterine cancer, like when it spreads beyond the uterus and into the abdomen and pelvis.
This can sometimes block off parts of the bowel and prevent stool from moving through the intestines like normal, triggering gastrointestinal issues that include:
Diarrhea
Constipation
Abdominal pain
Getting full fast
People who have had abdominal surgery or radiation to the abdomen are at a higher risk of having a bowel obstruction with cancer.
Unintentional Weight Loss
People with more advanced uterine cancer may shed pounds unintentionally.
This can happen when the cancer spreads from the uterus to the abdomen, causing a tumor to push against the stomach and make you feel full even when you haven't eaten much.
Weight loss can also occur in later-stage uterine cancer because any advanced cancer can trigger inflammation in the body, which may disrupt normal metabolic processes and influence the behavior of cytokines, which are small proteins that affect the immune system.
These processes can cause muscle and fat to break down too quickly.
This inflammation can eventually decrease your appetite, said Dr. Schram.
Increased Urge To Pee
If the cancer mass in your uterus gets big enough, it can push against your bladder.
As a result, the bladder isn't able to fill as much as usual, and you may feel compelled to empty it more often, explained Dr. Matulonis.
Although you may feel the urge to urinate more frequently, you might have a light stream.
You Might Not Experience Any Symptoms
While the vast majority of people diagnosed with uterine cancer will experience abnormal vaginal bleeding, some people have no symptoms at all.
Other people might feel just generally unwell without anything specific to point to, said Dr. Schram.
People with uterine cancer might not have any noticeable symptoms because the uterus is made to be able to expand—say, to fit a tumor, in the case of cancer—without significant consequence to the nearby structures, explained Dr. Schram.
When To Contact a Healthcare Provider
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends contacting a healthcare provider if you have vaginal bleeding or discharge that's abnormal for you, especially if you've post-menopausal.
You may also want to seek medical care if you've experienced any other uterine cancer symptoms for at least two weeks.
There are no regular screenings to determine if you have uterine cancer.
This makes it especially important to pay attention to possible symptoms.
Once you visit a healthcare provider, they can do a proper physical exam and possibly perform an ultrasound to look at the inside of your uterus.
The results from those exams will determine whether a biopsy or further testing is needed for a more accurate diagnosis.
Share All sharing options for: No one knows why these Covid-19 patients’ symptoms keep relapsing
On April 11, more than a month after she first fell ill with Covid-19, Melanie Montano spritzed perfume around her bedroom to test her senses.
She couldn’t smell anything.
The next morning, Montano woke up and noticed a “faintly fragrant” scent; her symptoms were finally subsiding.
She had more energy for household chores, phone calls with friends, and remote work.
“I felt a massive wave of encouragement zap me back to life,” said Montano, 32, who lives in New Jersey.
Then, five days later, fever, shortness of breath, and crippling gastrointestinal issues suddenly returned.
“This has been the pattern, on-and-off, ever since.”
Now, more than two months after she first fell ill, Montano still has symptoms.
In May, the World Health Organization announced that Covid-19 recoveries were taking longer than expected and that some patients were experiencing what appeared to be a “relapse” of symptoms.
This contradicted an earlier WHO report, which stated that recovery for non-severe Covid-19 cases should only take two weeks.
That guidance has been questioned, as more stories of long recoveries and lingering symptoms emerge.
It’s too early to really know what is causing symptom relapse, according to several physicians I spoke to, but almost all of them reported treating or hearing about patients who had cycling symptoms.
Doctors and research scientists aren’t sure whether potential relapses mean patients are still infectious — and whether the recurrent symptoms are from other infections, viral reactivation, chronic post-viral conditions, or the virus simply taking its normal course.
For patients who think they’ve recovered from Covid-19, symptom relapses can be emotionally, physically, and financially devastating.
For researchers looking for answers, the relapses remain one of the ongoing mysteries of Covid-19.
When it just keeps coming back
In researching symptom relapse, I spoke with more than a dozen patients who believed they’d experienced the return of symptoms at least once during their lengthy recoveries from Covid-19.
Almost all first became sick in March, tested positive for Covid-19 within the following month, and are still experiencing symptoms today.
Most sought medical care during their perceived symptom relapse(s), but few were satisfied with the advice they got.
Susan Nagle, 54, of Massachusetts, first experienced symptoms in late March and tested positive in April.
A month into her illness, her symptoms began to disappear.
She was finally fever-free, and her fatigue, chest pain, and shortness of breath improved significantly.
“I was starting to be able to get projects done around the house ...
and I realized I wasn’t walking around with my pulse oximeter,” Nagle said.
Then, on May 9, Nagle’s fever returned, spiking at 101 degrees Fahrenheit.
Eventually her chest pain and breathlessness came back, as well.
Today, Nagle is battling symptoms that she says are “worse than they were at the start.”
Cara Schiavo, 31, of New Jersey, experienced a similar episode.
She tested positive for Covid-19 on March 10 and was sick with fever, shortness of breath, and chest pain.
On week four, her symptoms started to subside.
“I felt like I was getting back to my old self,” Schiavo said.
“I started walking, exercising, and even told family and friends
[I’d] recovered.”
A week later, her symptoms returned, along with new dermatological and GI issues.
“Relapse to me is a scary word,” Schiavo said.
Until the WHO’s recent announcement, it was mostly just Covid-19 survivors and patients using the word “relapse.”
Until she joined an online support group where others were discussing it, Montano said, the concept of “relapse” felt like a “feverish supposition.”
Nagle said she doesn’t think of her experiences as relapses.
“I think this is [just] what it means to have Covid-19,” she explained.
Not knowing if they’re infectious, relapsed patients are staying home from work and fear their illness will get worse
Many of the patients I spoke with have not been able to return to work, even remotely, because they still feel sick, and some fear that excess activity triggers their symptom relapses.
None have received confirmation from doctors about whether they’re still infectious.
Montano and Schiavo sought medical care when their symptoms returned, but neither was satisfied with the answers they received.
“My [primary care doctor] was less than helpful,” Montano told me.
Schiavo says her doctor dismissed her symptoms as anxiety.
Related My coronavirus survivor group is my most important medical support right now
After three months of isolating at home, Montano relapsed again in late May, and her doctor suggested she be retested for Covid-19.
She went to a drive-through testing center, where she had to self-administer a nasal swab, and received a negative result.
The test result confused Montano, given her recurrent fever and other symptoms, but she has continued to isolate at home in case she is still infectious.
Daniel Kuritzkes, the chief of the division of infectious diseases at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, says that patients returning to work face “a real challenge,” given the lack of information on contagiousness.
When asked whether patients like Montano should be concerned about returning to work due to their lingering symptoms, Kuritzkes said, “We don’t have a good answer for that at the moment.”
The question of when to return to work is especially confusing for health care workers and others who employers sometimes require to test negative before they can resume their jobs, he added.
Angela Aston, 49, is a registered nurse in Texas who contracted Covid-19 in late March while treating a patient.
She hasn’t returned to work since April 23, when she thought she had recovered from the virus, after being fever-free for 72 hours.
But at the end of her shift that day, Aston noticed she was feeling “shaky and weak,” and by the following afternoon, her fever and shortness of breath had returned.
“I was confused
[and] anxious,” Aston told me.
“I had a meltdown in the staff lounge.”
While Aston is eager to return to work, none of her doctors know if she’s actively infectious, and she says her workplace has “no idea” when it would be safe for her to return.
“The [CDC’s] return-to-work guidelines say three days no fever, but those guidelines are not appropriate for me,” Aston said.
“People freak out if a person with recent Covid-19 has an elevated temperature and wants to be around them.
Even if it has been 10 days with no fever.”
Aston has been retested three times — one negative result, followed by two positives.
Since return-to-work guidelines vary and retesting can be unreliable, many relapsed patients face confusion and financial distress.
Zackary Berger, a primary care doctor and associate professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, thinks retesting relapsed patients isn’t helpful because the test results aren’t always reliable.
Some researchers estimate the rate of false negatives to be around 30 percent, due in part to discrepancies in how tests are administered and the variety of types of tests that are being used.
A recent study from South Korea suggests that patients may test positive even after they have fully recovered and are no longer infectious.
Because the 285 survivors did not appear to have infected any of their 790 close contacts, and the virus in their samples did not appear to be alive, researchers now believe tests may be picking up small remnants of the virus that remain in the body even after recovery.
Berger says he sees many patients who need documentation that they’re virus-free to return to work, but his institution does not recommend retesting, given the concerns about current testing methods.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend guidelines for health care workers returning to work after being sick, which are dependent on test availability and follow either a test-based strategy (fever and respiratory symptoms have improved, and the worker has tested negative) or a symptom-based strategy (the worker has been fever-free for 72 hours and 10 days have passed since symptoms first appeared).
Aston wants to go back to work and is frustrated by the duration of her illness.
“When am I going to be free from this?”
she asked.
“For another 10 days?
20 days?
Because my fever always comes back.
”
Montano feels similarly alone.
“I felt anxious, I felt confused, and I felt the need to slap on a facade that aligned with the speedy, two-week recovery period depicted in the news,” she said.
“Not a single health care provider has offered any solid, tangible guidelines on what to do next to address my issues”
Aston knows she’s lucky to still be earning wages, even though she can’t return to work.
On May 4, almost two months into her illness, Montano lost her job as a post-graduate academic writing instructor, when the position was made redundant.
Now, Montano’s struggling to find a new source of income, while managing her recurring symptoms.
“The job-hunting process is already work in itself, and it’s been exhausting having to push myself harder than my body is able to,” Montano said.
“My first inclination is to tackle the job search with full-force, but the stark reality is my debilitating fatigue continues to impede any successful attempts to be proactive.”
Aston has found her fever often returns after she gets out of bed and moves around.
One doctor she consulted suggested she stay in bed to avoid future relapses.
She found this advice unrealistic.
“Not a single health care provider has offered any solid, tangible guidelines on what to do next to address my issues,” she said.
For patients like Montano, Nagle, and Aston, who say they can’t see an end in sight, long-term impacts may be physical, mental, and financial.
Gary Phelan, an employment lawyer in Connecticut, told me the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has not yet decided whether Covid-19 will be recognized as a disability under the Americans with Disabilities Act because the virus is so new.
Phelan, who has represented Covid-19 patients, says “until the EEOC takes that position it will lead to more uncertainty and, as a result, ... more Covid-19 victims losing their jobs or not being accommodated.”
We don’t know why people are relapsing.
Here are some early guesses.
Based on the limited understanding of Covid-19, here are four possible explanations for patients who seem to experience symptom relapse.
All are currently theoretical; the physicians I spoke to warned that science and medicine are still struggling to catch up with the novel virus.
We don’t yet have hard evidence that any of these explanations are the true culprit, and other infections may explain symptom relapse, too.
1)
The virus might be reactivating
The word “relapse” implies a resurgence of something previously dormant or nonexistent, and many patients I spoke to assumed they’re experiencing some kind of viral reactivation.
According to Bernard P. Chang, an emergency physician and psychologist at Columbia University in New York City, “viral reactivation is the concept that a latent or ‘not active’ virus that is already within your system ‘awakens’ or switches to an active phase and begins causing symptoms in patients.”
Viral reactivation is well known in other illnesses, such as herpes, which remains dormant in between outbreaks.
But it’s not a proven (or disproven) aspect of the new coronavirus.
Kuritzkes thinks it is unlikely that SARS-CoV-2 can reactivate because the virus infects and spreads differently than ones that do so.
Right now, this is a possibility, but we don’t yet have scientific data either way.
2) People might be getting reinfected
Can someone get the coronavirus, completely clear it from their system, and then catch it all over again?
The answer would depend on whether people can develop immunity to the coronavirus (and if so, for how long).
Scientists and researchers are urgently trying to answer this question, as governments all over the world pin hope on a wave of immune survivors who can travel freely and revive the economy.
Recent studies on immunity bode well for the possibility, but the WHO warns there’s no guarantee.
One such experiment found that rhesus macaques monkeys that were infected once were not able to be reinfected.
But that’s just one study, and a lot of research remains to be done.
In order to determine if humans can become immune, scientists will need to further study B cells and T cells (which help to create antibodies), improve the accuracy of antibody tests, and determine what level of antibodies confirm some level of immunity.
3) It might be the normal course of Covid-19
Jeremy Faust, an ER doctor and colleague of Kuritzkes at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, told me that mild viral symptoms often “return or get a little worse after initially recovering,” citing the common cold as one example.
“Some may simply have coronavirus symptoms that come and go, but slowly improve over time, like a pendulum running out of energy,” he explained.
“I can’t think of any illness that doesn’t ebb and flow in terms of symptom resolution, to some extent.
So in that regard, coronavirus may be no different.”
4) Relapses might be chronic post-viral syndromes
Many of the patients I spoke with were concerned their condition might be chronic because of how long their symptoms had lasted and how regular their relapses were.
“My fear is that ‘relapses’ are my new normal and this has done permanent damage,” Nagle told me.
“I have yet to hear a story of someone who has had the same symptoms for the same length of time and are now back to whatever they called normal before they were infected.”
Despite some patients’ fears that their symptoms will never end, Kuritzkes is optimistic.
He urges people facing nonlinear recoveries to “not get discouraged” though they should speak to a health care provider if they experience high fevers, joint swelling, or persistent fatigue.
“Based on what we know about coronaviruses generally, it is very likely that all of these individuals will completely recover,” he said.
Kuritzkes, Chang, and Berger all mentioned post-viral syndromes as a possible explanation for symptom relapse — although Kuritzkes doesn’t think such post-viral syndromes are likely to be common — and many patients I spoke with had received similar information from their doctors.
Neil Stone, a specialist in tropical and infectious diseases at University College London Hospitals, recently tweeted that he’d seen an uptick in hospitalizations of patients recovering from Covid-19 and theorized that the “wide array of covid phenomena which we don’t yet understand ... may one day come to be known as Post Covid Syndrome.”
According to Kuritzkes, post-viral fatigue syndrome, for instance, is sometimes found in patients who’ve had mononucleosis, among other infections.
“I’ve heard anecdotally of some [Covid-19] patients who seem to be experiencing something akin to that,” he explained.
“Since we’ve only got three to four months of experience in the United States, it’s very hard to say what proportion would go on to develop ... some form of post-viral fatigue syndrome.”
Some researchers are also concerned that Covid-19 might trigger ME/CFS (myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome), after noticing that some patients with pre-existing ME/CFS experienced an exacerbation of those symptoms after contracting Covid-19.
The Open Medicine Foundation, an organization dedicated to ME/CFS research, recently announced a study that will examine the prevalence of potential chronic conditions like ME/CFS in patients with Covid-19.
Another possibility Kuritzkes suggests is that patients with relapsing symptoms may be experiencing an inflammatory syndrome similar to Kawasaki disease, which has recently been linked to cases of Covid-19 in children and young adults.
It causes an inflammation of blood vessels that can lead to severe cardiac complications.
However, we don’t yet know if this syndrome can develop in people of all ages.
Like many other aspects of the current pandemic, the question of relapse remains unanswered, and the stakes are increasingly high.
Almost 2 million people have been diagnosed with Covid-19 in the US alone, and experts believe infection rates may peak again in the fall.
Stories of relapsed patients indicate that those who fall ill and survive may still face devastating consequences of the disease.
Fiona Lowenstein is the founder of Body Politic, a queer feminist wellness collective, events series, and media company aimed at creating content and events on accessible wellness for marginalized populations.
Her last piece for Vox was about the Covid-19 survivor support group she founded.
People with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) have nearly two times as many rare secondary mutations in BBS-associated genes than their healthy peers, and in a non-random pattern, according to a recent study.
The findings, along with the presence of interactions between these mutations, suggest that additional genetic variation may contribute to the variability and severity of BBS’s symptoms.
“It is imperative that we broaden our search for answers beyond the single causal gene,” Nico Katsanis, PhD, the study’s senior author, said in a press release.
Katsanis is director of the Advanced Center for Translational and Genetic Medicine at the Stanley Manne Children’s Research Institute of Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago.
While further research is needed to explore such contributions, these discoveries may help better understand the genetic complexity of BBS and other so-called “single-gene” diseases, in addition to opening new therapeutic avenues.
“The work also gives us multiple potential entry points for therapies: some disease-causing genes are difficult to target — but their neighbors might be amenable,” added Katsanis, who is also a professor of pediatrics and cell and molecular biology at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine.
The study, “Evidence for secondary-variant genetic burden and non-random distribution across biological modules in a recessive ciliopathy,” was published in the journal Nature Genetics.
Mutations in at least 20 different genes (BBS1–BBS20) have been associated with the development of BBS, a rare “single gene” disease affecting body weight regulation, vision, and cognitive and kidney functions.
Most BBS genes provide information to produce proteins involved in the formation of three different protein complexes — the BBSome, the transition zone complex, and the chaperonin complex — involved in the regulation of primary cilia, cellular structures that act like signaling antennas.
BBS symptoms and severity vary greatly between patients, even among those in the same family, challenging the disorder’s diagnosis and management.
This symptom variability, along with reports of secondary mutations in BBS genes other than the main disease-causing gene suggest the influence of an additional genetic burden that makes the primary mutation’s effect more (or less) potent.
However, assessing such genetic burden is particularly challenging in rare disorders due to the low frequency of main and secondary mutations.
Now, researchers at the Stanley Manne Children’s Research Institute and their colleagues provided evidence of a secondary-variant burden in BBS.
Using a series of genetic and functional approaches, they analyzed the genetic data of 277 BBS patients with known disease-causing mutations in one of 17 BBS genes, and 872 unaffected individuals used as controls.
The team evaluated whether BBS patients showed a greater number of secondary variants in these 17 genes beyond the main disease-causing mutation, and whether this additional variation was distributed in a non-random way.
The confirmation of these two features would indicate the contribution of second-site mutations to the disease.
Results from two smaller groups of patients and controls were confirmed subsequently in two larger groups.
A group of 50 people with a clinical genetic disorder other than BBS and who carried mutations in one of the BBS genes also was included.
The findings showed that BBS patients had nearly twice as many rare secondary mutations in BBS genes than controls.
Their rare nature is consistent with natural selection against them, “indicating that they are probably [damaging] and occurring at functional positions,” the researchers wrote.
The investigators also found a significant over-representation of second-site variants in chaperonin complex-genes, “suggesting that this module potentially has the most physiologically potent interaction capability,” they added.
Additional gene interaction experiments using zebrafish supported this hypothesis, as all observed epistatic interactions involved one of chaperonin complex-genes.
Epistatic interactions are those resulting in effects greater or smaller than those predicted by the addition of each variant’s effects.
“These data indicate a complex genetic architecture for BBS,” the researchers wrote, adding that “understanding the biochemical interplay between the chaperonin module and the BBSome will probably further improve our understanding of the role of the additional variation.”
(Notably, the chaperonin complex was has been shown to interact with the BBSome.)
Further studies using detailed clinical data on disease symptoms and onset are needed to determine the contribution of this genetic burden to BBS symptoms, the team said.
“We have always known that disease causality was not binary, but a continuum, but we lacked the proof and the tools to detect it,” Katsanis said, noting that now he believes “we have a new depth of resolution to understand the problem better.”
“To me, this is not too different from the development of tools that increased the magnification of telescopes.
Now we can see deeper, better, and start making predictions about diseases: why they happen, why the progress the way they do,” he added.
“We speculate that the systematic measurement of burden of other genetically heterogeneous disorders in which all of the causal genes are considered as one baseline entity … will reveal similar burden observations,” the researchers concluded.
The team is now applying these concepts to other related disorders, paying close attention to variant interactions that worsen or lessen disease severity.
A loss of a sense of smell or taste may be a symptom of COVID-19, medical groups representing ear, nose and throat specialists have warned.
Citing a growing number of cases around the globe, the American Academy of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery and ENT UK each issued warnings about patients who tested positive for the new coronavirus with the only symptom being a lost or altered sense of smell or taste.
"Anecdotal evidence is rapidly accumulating from sites around the world that anosmia and dysgeusia are significant symptoms associated with the COVID-19 pandemic," the American Academy of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery wrote in a statement.
Get daily coronavirus updates in your inbox:
Sign up for our newsletter now.
Anosmia is the loss of smell while dysgeusia is an altered sense of taste.
South Korea, China and Italy have all reported "significant numbers" of known COVID-19 patients with lost or reduced sense of smell, according to joint statement by Claire Hopkins, president of the British Rhinological Society, and Nirmal Kumar, president of ENT UK.
"In Germany it is reported that more than 2 in 3 confirmed cases have anosmia.
In South Korea, where testing has been more widespread, 30% of patients testing positive have had anosmia as their major presenting symptom in otherwise mild cases," they wrote.
Live updates:What to now about coronavirus today
The American Academy of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery advised that these symptoms should be added to the list for screening patients for possible COVID-19 infection, and ENT UK said the symptoms should signal to health care professionals treating a patient to wear full personal protective equipment.
While another viral infection or seasonal allergies could cause the loss of smell or taste, experiencing the symptoms without other respiratory illnesses warrants "serious consideration for self-isolation and testing of these individuals," the American group said.
Some patients have experienced the symptom early on in COVID-19 illnesses, while others experience it further into the illness, according to Dr. James C. Denneny III, executive vice president and CEO of the American Academy of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery.
"The symptoms are clearly not as common as cough, fever and shortness of breath, but in the absence of a known cause for the smell disorder, this symptom may be an additional identifier for infected patients," he told USA TODAY in a statement.
'This virus just has the whole kit and caboodle':COVID-19 symptoms can be all or nothing
Noelle Ruiz, 27, first experienced a 101-degree fever, which subsided after about a day.
Within six days, though, a headache and cough developed into more serious symptoms, with chest pain, extreme fatigue and the inability to catch her breath.
“I couldn’t really take a deep breath, I didn’t feel like I had enough air in my lungs,” she said.
But Ruiz had another set of symptoms: "I lost taste, food wasn’t appetizing, I couldn’t smell anything.
"
With the seasonal flu, patients can experience a cluster of symptoms as the illness begins, including a cough, fever, congestion, fatigue and loss of smell or taste, according to Dr. Gregory Levitin, an otolaryngologist at New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai.
"What is most unusual about this new finding is that the loss of smell or taste was the only presenting symptom in a group of patients under the age of 40 who ultimately tested positive for the COVID-19 virus," Levitin wrote in an email to USA TODAY.
Rudy Gobert, the Utah Jazz center who tested positive for the coronavirus nearly two weeks ago, tweeted that he lost his sense of smell and taste, writing "haven’t been able to smell anything for the last four days.
"
According to Denneny and Levitin, damage to nerves in the naval cavity is believed to cause anosmia.
"It is unclear whether this is due to direct injury or swelling, but the symptom of anosmia from a viral illness is typically sudden and does not often respond to treatment with steroids or antiviral medications," Levitin added.
What does the coronavirus do to your body?
Everything to know about the infection process
While losing smell or taste can affect a patient's quality of life, it can also be serious given that it impedes their ability to discern possibly dangerous odors, like gas leaks, he said.
Denneny said patients could recover their sense of smell fully, permanently lose it or land anywhere in between.
"While it is too early to determine how patients affected by COVID-19 will recover, given what we know it would be reasonable to hope that they would do as well as patients affected by the seasonal flu in years past," Levitin added.
Contributing: Elizabeth Weise
Follow USA TODAY's Ryan Miller on Twitter @RyanW_Miller
MENASHA (NBC 26) — Laura Thiel is a single mother in Menasha battling multiple sclerosis.
As time passes, her symptoms worsen.
But it's not too late for a procedure that could stop or even reverse the symptoms she's already experiencing.
She just needs to raise enough money before any damage becomes permanent.
“They didn't really explain to me how life-changing and devastating it could be,” Laura said, remembering the day she learned her diagnosis.
Laura had been suffering from intense migraines and numbness in her limbs that eventually led her to seek medical treatment.
After an abnormal CAT scan, the hospital conducted an MRI and found lesions on her brain.
"To rule out anything else, like Lyme's Disease or other things, they had to do a spinal tap.
And so they did a spinal tap
and then they found that I had MS," Laura said.
"But I didn't really know what it was.
And the doctor kind of just gave me a pamphlet.
"
MS is a chronic neurological disease that affects the immune system.
It has been called a "snowflake disease" because no two snowflakes are the same, and people living with MS can have completely different experiences.
Dr. Ahmed Obeidat is an Associate Professor of Neurology at the Medical College of Wisconsin.
He is the Director of the Fellowship Program for Multiple Sclerosis.
He's never met Laura, but MS is his specialty.
"People will have new neurological symptoms, meaning that they could lose vision, they could lose the ability to move an arm or a leg, they could lose the ability to control [their] bladder, they could lose the ability to speak sometimes, and then the ability to walk with good balance, so they could lose their balance," Obeidat said.
"Lots of fatigue or lots of cognitive difficulties can happen in MS.
"
Laura has experienced all of these symptoms since she was first diagnosed in 2008.
“It can really literally be anywhere and anything, so it's just so unpredictable," she said.
"You don't know what's going to happen or where it's gonna go.”
If she overexerts herself or even experiences temperatures too high, it can be disastrous for her.
"I have to have my house at like 71 all year long.
If it gets to 74, my legs start to go weak and I'm like stumbling around the house," Laura said.
"The air stopped working and we had to go to a hotel.
"
She said she's tried many medications and their effectiveness is waning.
She's spoken with her neurologist, and after trying so many different outlets, there's hope for her to have a normal life again.
There is a treatment called autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Obeidat helped explain this treatment, but he wanted to be very clear that he's never met Laura and he was not explaining it to recommend it for her.
That is a decision between Laura and her doctor.
"We're trying to work with the immune system to try to reorganize it, you may say.
We tell the nerve cells, 'Well, you shouldn't be attacking the brain and spine, you should do your stuff and fight infections and cancer.
And this is what these therapies are doing," Obeidat said.
For the treatment, doctors would mobilize Laura's own stem cells from her bone marrow into her bloodstream.
They would then harvest those stem cells, oblate — or, wipe out — her immune system, and then reintroduce her stem cells so that her body can regrow a new system that might not attack itself anymore.
It is an experimental treatment, and it's been used to help with other autoimmune diseases including certain cancers, but there are risks.
That's why Obeidat says that there are several case series and ongoing clinical trials for it.
It can be highly successful, but it is reserved only for people who failed other therapies.
"There is a high success rate with this procedure.
There are risks, and those risks can be serious," said Obeidat.
Unfortunately, the treatment is expensive.
So, Laura and her loved ones have partnered with Community Benefit Tree to raise money.
The nonprofit takes donations and those donations are tax-deductible, unlike a GoFundMe.
Anyone interested in helping Laura reach her goal can donate at this link.
It also shares upcoming events and fundraisers planned for her.
“The Community Benefit Tree helped us put a big fundraiser together last fall.
It was supposed to be a one-and-done event.
We were supposed to raise $72,000... and while we did do a great event, and it was a lot of work, and I think was pretty successful, we only got about — not even halfway to our goal,” said Carrie Lane.
Carrie is Laura's cousin and one of her primary event coordinators.
"We're gonna keep trying, but we can't do it ourselves.
And that's why we we need to rely on the generous people in this community to help us.
We all think Laura's reason is pretty great.
And we need to get her this treatment.
So, we don't give up," Carrie said.
Laura and her loved ones need to act fast so that the damage to her system never becomes permanent.
“The sooner I can get this done, the better.
Because while I'm waiting to get HSCT more damage can occur and I can't reverse that,” Laura said.
"I could wake up completely paralyzed tomorrow for all I know," said Laura."
And not only that, there's complications where there's lung weakness and...
I have lung weakness.
That's the other symptom that I — big one — that I had.
"
Laura's event planners have two more major dates set.
After that, they have to take a break for the year.
"[We're] trying to raise as much money as we can for these two events because after this, we pretty much have to take a break," Carrie said.
"Those of us on Team Laura — a lot of us are accountants, so we're going into busy season, and we really probably won't be able to get back up and running with any events until like next spring or summer.
"
It's been a difficult journey for Laura, physically and emotionally.
But she has her daughter Arianna and the support of a family that loves her and refuses to give up on her.
“You're the most kind person and the most caring person I know.
And I think if everybody knew you the way that we know you, you'd already have your treatment," Carrie said.
The final fundraiser planned this year will be held at the Capital Center in Appleton on September 16.
It's a Bags for Laura bean bag tournament, and you can register here.
But there are many ways to support Laura in her effort to take her life back.
You can make a donation, become a fundraiser for her, or sponsor or pledge any of her existing fundraisers.
Working on your muscles could help delay the onset of Alzheimer's symptoms, researchers have revealed.
Researchers from the Federal University of São Paulo and the University of São Paulo in Brazil have uncovered strong evidence that resistance training – where muscles are worked against a weight or a force – could have significant consequences for the brains of dementia patients.
Before you hurriedly renew your gym membership or break out the home exercise equipment, it's worth bearing in mind that this was a mouse model study.
Nevertheless, the same principles are likely to apply to humans.
"This confirms that physical activity can reverse neuropathological alterations that cause clinical symptoms of the disease," says neuroscientist Henrique Correia Campos, from the Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP).
Mice with a genetic mutation that causes beta-amyloid plaques to build up in the brain – as seen in individuals with Alzheimer's – were put through a four-week resistance exercise training program involving ladders and weights before being compared to mice without the mutation.
Not only was the build-up of plaques reduced after exercise, levels of the hormone corticosterone in the plasma of the weight-training mice were similar to plasma levels in mice from the control group.
Corticosterone equates to cortisol in humans, which is produced when the body is under stress, and has been previously linked to Alzheimer's.
As Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia can produce wandering and restlessness in mice, the team also tested the beta-amyloid plaque mice for anxiety.
Here again the resistance training seemed to help.
"We also observed the animals' behavior to assess their anxiety in the open field test and found that resistance exercise reduced hyperlocomotion to similar levels to the controls among mice with the phenotype associated with Alzheimer's," says neuroscientist Deidiane Elisa Ribeiro from the University of São Paulo in Brazil.
Aside from keeping in mind potential differences between mouse and human physiology, the exact role protein plaques play in Alzheimer's is still debated, leaving room for debate over the extent of benefits resistance training might have for dementia patients.
Still, resistance training has few downsides, especially as we age.
It increases muscle mass and strength, boosts bone density, and helps with balance and makes everyday tasks easier to perform.
It's also one of those exercises that's easier to keep up as you get older, leaving few excuses not add it to your daily routine.
The earlier the better!
Previous studies have noted how this particular type of exercise can strengthen connections in the brain that are likely to break as dementia sets in, so it looks as though activity like this can guard against dementia as well as alleviate the symptoms – assuming the same effects are shown in humans of course.
Scientists are still trying to untangle the relationship between Alzheimer's, its root causes, and the general consequences of the body getting older, but resistance training could potentially help in all three areas.
"The main possible reason for this effectiveness is the anti-inflammatory action of resistance exercise," says UNIFESP neurophysiologist Beatriz Monteiro Longo.
The research has been published in Frontiers in Neuroscience.
Surgery is the first treatment for most cancers - if caught early enough - with chemotherapy and radiotherapy being the two other most effective treatments.
“It can be devastating to be diagnosed at a late stage when there are fewer treatment options,” adds Jewell.
“Not only is it difficult for the person with the illness, but it has a huge impact on friends and family.
It can be about fighting for more time with loved ones, which is very important.”
As well as the sudden loss of his father in 2021, Dave also lost his mother to pancreatic cancer in 2019.
“She had a stomach ache for a month or so and at first, she ignored it,” says Dickinson.
Eventually, she went to her GP who sent her home thinking it was an infection, but when she turned yellow, tests discovered a tumour in her pancreas that was causing problems in her liver.
“She had a stent put in to open up the passageway between her pancreas and liver and that seemed to help and the prognosis was good,” says Dickinson.
“We were optimistic she’d have treatment and live a cancer-free life.”
But the chemotherapy to shrink the tumour was problematic; Dickinson’s mum kept getting infection after infection and the chemotherapy had to be stopped.
Eight months after diagnosis, she passed away, at 56.
“It was very tough because she didn’t want to talk about dying but at least we got a chance to tell her we loved her and to reassure her everything would be OK,” says Dickinson.
“I do wish she’d been diagnosed earlier - you want as much time as possible - but it wasn’t meant to be.”
According to Dr Sarah Holmes, medical director at Marie Curie UK, the country’s leading end of life charity (mariecurie.org.uk), the length and quality of time you have with a loved one after a diagnosis is crucial.
“If there’s a short space of time between diagnosis and death, people spend their time grappling with the logistics of the illness, such as doctors’ appointments, treatments, rather than making sure they’re having quality moments and conversations with their loved ones,” says Dr Holmes.
“A shock death can compound the grief.
If everything happens quickly, you can’t process what’s going on and guilt can even crop up - like ‘should we have spotted something’?
A longer time gives you a chance to work these questions through and adjust.
It can be a very meaningful time.”
Share on Pinterest New research suggests that a low fat, plant-based diet rich in soy may help reduce hot flash symptoms and promote weight loss.
Kelvin Murray/Getty Images A new study suggests that a low fat, plant-based diet rich in soy is as effective as hormone replacement therapy (HRT) for reducing hot flashes.
The 12-week trial found that a plant-rich diet reduced moderate to severe hot flashes by 88%.
The diet may have also helped women lose 8 pounds on average and improved their quality of life.
Some experts say the study isn’t robust enough and that HRT is still the best option for reducing severe hot flashes.
More research is needed to determine the impact of diet on reducing menopausal symptoms like hot flashes.
A recent study reported that a plant-based, soy-rich diet could alleviate menopausal symptoms with the same effectiveness as hormone replacement therapy (HRT).
The Women’s Study for the Alleviation of Vasomotor Symptoms (WAVS) trial found that this food-based approach reduced moderate to severe hot flashes by 88%.
HRT has been shown to improve these symptoms by 70%–90%.
Moreover, trial participants lost an average of 8 pounds during the 12-week study.
Lead researcher Dr. Neal Barnard, president of the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine and adjunct professor at the George Washington University School of Medicine, said in a news release: “We do not fully understand yet why this combination works but it seems that these three elements are key— avoiding animal products, reducing fat, and adding a serving of soybeans.
Our results mirror the diets of places in the world, like pre-Westernized Japan and modern-day Yucatán Peninsula, where a low fat, plant-based diet including soybeans is more prevalent and where postmenopausal women experience fewer symptoms.”
These findings were recently published in Menopause: The Journal of the North American Menopause Society.
Hot flash symptoms and nutrition Vasomotor symptoms include recurrent hot flashes, night sweats, and blood pressure fluctuations.
Medical News Today discussed this study with Dr. G. Thomas Ruiz, the obstetrics and gynecology lead at MemorialCare Orange Coast Medical Center in Fountain Valley, CA.
He was not involved in this research.
Dr. Ruiz explained that vasomotor symptoms arise primarily from changes in the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis, which regulates sex hormone secretions.
The hypothalamus, located in the center of the brain, helps control the internal thermostat.
Fluctuating and decreasing hormone levels during menopause cause disruption in the hypothalamus.
Hot flashes happen as the brain area is trying to reset its temperature, Dr. Ruiz shared.
Effects of a low fat, plant-based diet on menopause symptoms Dr. Barnard and his research team recruited postmenopausal women ages 40 to 65 years for a parallel-design study in September 2020 and February 2021.
Out of 1,662 respondents, 71 remained for the final data analysis.
An intervention group followed a low fat, vegan diet with half a cup of cooked, nongenetically modified soybeans a day for 12 weeks.
A control group made no dietary changes.
Both groups took a vitamin B12 supplement daily and were asked not to take any other supplements, change medications, or exercise regimens.
A mobile application recorded the frequency and severity of hot flashes.
Participants completed the Menopause-Specific Quality of Life survey to record vasomotor, physical, psychosocial, and sexual symptoms.
Why limit healthy fats?
The study’s recommended diet was partially inspired by a traditional Japanese diet emphasizing plant-based foods, soy products, and low amounts of oils.
MNT asked Dr. Barnard about limiting even “healthy” oils and fats, such as nuts and avocados: “The fat in nuts and avocados is healthier than the fat in dairy products and meat.
The former are low in saturated fat, and the latter are loaded with it.
But we often reduce fat of all kinds in our research studies.
Oils and fats — ‘good’ or ‘bad’ — tend to interfere with weight loss
[and] loss of excess weight seems to help with hot flashes.”
“Oils and fats modify estrogen activity.
During the study, we did find that those women who carefully avoided oily foods seemed to have faster benefits,” Dr. Barnard added.
Certain foods reduce moderate to severe hot flashes The intervention diet may have resulted in significantly reduced menopausal symptoms.
The total hot flash frequency in the fall cohort (September 2020) dropped by 78% in the intervention group and decreased by 39% in the control group.
Moderate to severe hot flashes in the spring cohort (February 2021) intervention group fell by 88%, while the control saw a decrease of 34%.
Women with seven or more hot flashes per day at the start of the study experienced a 93% reduction in symptoms in the intervention group.
The control group had 36% fewer symptoms at the end of the study.
The researchers found that reducing fat consumption and increasing fiber intake correlated with reduced severe hot flashes.
The intervention group members lost an average of 7.93 pounds, while the control group participants lost one-half a pound on average.
Limitations to menopause research Dr. Ruiz saw the cohort study design as a disadvantage.
He argued that a double-blind study is “really the only way to come up with an observation that may be medically meaningful.”
“A healthy diet will help you overall because it will make [you] feel better in general,” Dr. Ruiz said, adding that people who regularly eat healthily are also more likely to exercise as well.
Dr. Ruiz added that the study’s small sample increased the possibility of a “huge placebo effect.”
The study’s authors did admit that placebo effects could not be ruled out.
It should also be noted that several of the study’s co-authors received compensation from the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine for their contributions.
“When the results are very strong and consistent, a smaller sample can prove the effect,” Dr. Barnard said.
“In this case, the 88% drop in moderate-to-severe hot flashes is enormous, and statistically, there is less than 1 [in] 1000 that this is due to chance.
Our sample of 84 women was more than double the size needed to prove the effect.”
Areas for future study Dr. Barnard hopes that future investigations will assess this study’s dietary approach for other conditions that cause hot flashes.
For instance, he said that people with breast cancer or prostate cancer deal with hot flashes.
To date, they have limited options for relief.
“In both cases, a low fat vegan diet, plus soybeans, would be exactly the diet they should have clinically,” Dr. Barnard said.
By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy .
You can opt-out at any time.
Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go.
download the app
Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily.
Read preview
Loss of taste and smell has gone from a hallmark symptom of COVID-19 to a relatively rare one.
Until recently, many people with the disease reported trouble detecting strong scents, like perfume, or tasting sweet, bitter, or spicy foods that went beyond the sense-diminishing symptoms associated with the common cold.
In 2020, researchers at Massachusetts General Hospital and King's College London found that loss of taste and smell was the strongest predictor of a coronavirus infection, based on the daily symptoms of 2.6 million people.
This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers.
Become an Insider and start reading now.
But the Omicron variant has made traditional COVID-19 symptoms less common, while coldlike symptoms, such as a runny nose, sneezing, and a sore throat, have become more prevalent — particularly among vaccinated people.
"Loss of smell was something that many people used to report with COVID-19-symptom onset.
With Omicron, that doesn't seem to be reported much at all," Dr. Andy Pekosz, a virologist at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, told Insider, adding that there was "much more talk about coughs and scratchy throats with Omicron than we saw with other variant infections previously.
"
Advertisement
According to the latest data from the Zoe COVID Symptom Study, which uses a smartphone app to log how hundreds of thousands of people are feeling every day across the UK, less than 20% of people who recorded a positive test for COVID-19 in the past few weeks reported a loss of smell.
The data didn't distinguish between vaccinated and unvaccinated people, but 70% of the UK population has had at least two vaccine doses.
Loss of smell now ranks 17th on Zoe's list of COVID-19 symptoms, which means it's "relatively rare," the study's principal investigator, Tim Spector, wrote Sunday on Twitter.
By contrast, loss of smell was the sixth most common COVID-19 symptom among fully vaccinated people in June, when the Delta variant was dominant in the UK.
In March, before Delta was detected and vaccines were widely available, 60% of UK adults ages 16 to 65 on the Zoe app reported loss of smell at some point in their illness.
Other countries have noticed a similar pattern.
A December report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention identified just three instances of loss of taste or smell among the first 43 Omicron cases confirmed in the US.
Related stories
After an outbreak at a Christmas party in Norway, just 23% of people infected with Omicron reported reduced taste, and 12% reported reduced smell, compared with 83% who reported a cough and 78% who reported a runny or stuffy nose.
Most of the infected people were vaccinated with two doses of an mRNA vaccine.
Advertisement
Scientists are still trying to understand the link between COVID-19 and loss of taste or smell
Loss of taste was once a common COVID-19 symptom.
Georges Gobet/AFP/Getty Images
Some people with COVID-19 may have temporary issues tasting or smelling because their nasal passages are blocked, much like what happens with a run-of-the-mill cold.
But a small 2020 study found that participants with COVID-19 lost their sense of smell even when they could breathe freely and their noses weren't runny or congested.
What's more, the patients had a harder time detecting bitter or sweet tastes than patients with bad colds did.
The researchers theorized that loss of taste or smell may be related to the coronavirus interfering with the nervous system.
Another 2020 study suggested that the virus invaded cells that support olfactory neurons — the brain's messengers that help us process tastes and smells.
Damage to these supporting cells could trigger swelling in the nose and inhibit a person's sense of smell, even when that person isn't congested.
In severe cases, inflammation from COVID-19 could cause direct damage to olfactory neurons, leaving patients without their sense of smell for several months, years, or, perhaps, permanently.
Advertisement
A man takes a COVID-19 test at Sydney's international airport on November 28.
James D. Morgan/Getty Images
Still, loss of taste and smell is commonly associated with mild COVID-19 symptoms.
A January 2021 study found that 86% of people with mild COVID-19 cases across 18 European hospitals had a reduced sense of smell.
Scientists aren't sure why the symptom is rarer now that Omicron is spreading.
"I would not be surprised if the answer is due to differences in viral behavior in terms of where the virus best replicates," Scott Roberts, an assistant professor at Yale School of Medicine, told Insider.
"With Omicron compared to Delta, we know this replicates 70 times faster in the bronchi but 10 times slower in the lung tissue.
"
But there's a lot left to understand about Omicron infections, Pekosz said.
Advertisement
"There are three things Omicron is doing — transmitting more efficiently from person to person, causing different symptoms, and showing less severe disease," he said.
"We just don't know if these things are related to each other or if they are completely separate things that changed in Omicron at the same time.
"
At the very least, experts said, Omicron has changed the nature of a mild COVID-19 case.
"These are coldlike symptoms," Dr. Claire Steves, a scientist involved with the Zoe study, said of the latest Omicron data in a video last week.
"All the classic symptoms — fever, cough, and loss of smell — are much less prevalent in the current positive cases."
“I was kind of floored that I didn’t immediately connect my perimenopausal symptoms to perimenopause—and I write about health for a living!” says Jancee Dunn, the bestselling novelist, journalist, and former MTV VJ, who just released her latest book Hot and Bothered: What No One Tells You About Menopause and How to Feel Like Yourself Again.
After covering health and science for 20 years, Dunn was stunned by the lack of information available when she started going through perimenopause, a term that many women still aren’t familiar with (although around six thousand women will enter it today).
Considering doctors in most medical schools receive only one hour of instruction on menopause on average, this information gap, unfortunately, adds up.
Throughout her research for the book, Dunn interviewed a range of specialists, including ob-gyns, neuroscientists, dermatologists, psychologists, and more, in an effort to help readers understand how to find relief from symptoms, including hot flashes, painful sex, and changes in mood.
Ultimately, it’s a step toward removing the mystery around something that “happens to half of the population of the earth,” she stresses.
And interestingly, Dunn’s research is emerging at a time when our younger generations are more delighted than ever to cosplay as their elders.
Eileen Fisher clothes are trending on TikTok, Julia Fox is waxing on about the beauty of silver hair, and there’s a certain chicness and sophistication associated with getting older today.
Still, Dunn emphasizes that at any age, it’s no one’s responsibility to take on the persona of a mythic owl.
“One thing I did avoid in the book is the word ‘wisdom’ because I feel like there’s so much pressure on women to become wise when they get older,” says Dunn.
“Well, maybe you’re not wise!”
she laughs.
Instead, the conversation around menopause will ideally soon match the “openness about talking about periods and your bodies and mental health struggles,” brought on by Gen Z, says Dunn.
“I’m hoping for the generation going through menopause now that we could just bust it wide open—get rid of the stigma and the shame around it,” she says.
So, for a crash course, here is Dunn’s guide to 7 things no one tells you about menopause.
1.
The Difference Between Perimenopause and Menopause
The perimenopause process typically starts in your mid-’40s and lasts from 4 (on average) to 8 years.
“It’s the years leading up to menopause when your periods gets erratic, when your body starts changing a little bit,” says Dunn.
By the time it arrives, life is distracting on multiple levels.
“It usually is happening in the middle of your career; you’re raising children, you’re caring for a parent, so you’re not really thinking about it,” she explains.
Symptoms (below) can create “a kind of hormonal road that can be as rocky as puberty,” says Dunn, adding that it can worsen PMS symptoms.
Then, there’s menopause, which has an average entry age of 51.
“When you have gone 12 months without your period, then you are in menopause,” Dunn explains.
“You never leave menopause; you’re post-menopausal for many decades, and peri is the time leading up to it—for me, perimenopause was worse than when my period finally went away.”
2.
There Are An Extensive Range of Symptoms
“Everyone knows about hot flashes, but there are so many different ones: Brittle nails, dizziness, irregular heartbeat,” says Dunn of perimenopausal and menopausal symptoms, which can be as obscure as “formication,” the sensation of “having bugs crawling all over your skin—so there’s that,” she says.
“It can just be confusing.”
The reason Dunn mentions that there are “allegedly” 34 symptoms is that several experts she spoke with agree that there are likely many more.
“If you don’t know what they are, you cannot connect them to what’s happening to you,” she says of the importance of understanding the range.
“If you have an irregular period, you might not think that has anything to do with perimenopause; you might be thinking that you’re under stress or your birth control isn’t working—it could be any number of things, and that’s what happened to me.”
Dunn experienced her first symptoms while taking care of her toddler at 45.
“It’s exceedingly helpful to know what the symptoms are so you can get ahead of it instead of being caught, like I was, almost too late,” she says.
Perimenopausal depression is also one of three hormonally linked mood conditions in women (including PMS and postpartum).
“Women should be routinely screened for depression in perimenopause, which is seen as a window of vulnerability,” Dunn says.
“It can be hard to separate anxiety and depression from general life stress.”
3.
Normalizing the Conversation with Your Partner and Friends Is Essential
“I cannot make enough of a case for transparency and normalizing this conversation,” says Dunn.
“I didn’t even know my mother’s family history with menopause because we never had a conversation about it until I wrote this book; she just suffered in silence.”
In order for the discussion around menstruation to truly open up, it needs to be seen as another bodily function.
“I had to make myself be very upfront about menopause,” Dunn remembers.
“I talked about it to my friends, my husband, my 13-year-old, even at work,” she says.
“I realized so many times that I wasn’t telling my husband what was going on,” she says, emphasizing the importance of keeping partners in the loop.
“Sex started to hurt, and I felt embarrassed that I was getting older.
Who cares?
I’m getting older; why didn’t I tell him what was happening?
Instead, I started to avoid him.”
She’s found this to be incredibly common after speaking with multiple counselors of people in partnered relationships.
“One just starts to avoid the other, and they think, ‘Oh, this is it; it’s never going to get better,’ and I wish I had been more open because it’s the only way that we’re going to drag the subject out of the shadows.”
4.
Your Beauty Routine Will Need An Overhaul
“All of your go-to products will stop working–let’s talk about that,” says Dunn, who wasn’t prepared for how thoroughly her needs would change.
“I had to completely overhaul my entire routine, and my skin started getting really sensitive, which happens very often—your skin gets touchy and reactive.”
Dermatologists recommended products for eczema, which she switched to for the body, and she started adding retinol for the first time to her skin care.
“As my skin got noticeably drier, I used every kind of oil I possibly could; I have body oil, eyebrow oil, cuticle oil, lip oil, facial oil, if there is an oil, I put it on,” Dunn says, noting that additional luster has its own appeal now.
She also layers products, looks for peptides, and for hot flashes, “misting really is your friend, although it can’t be just water, it has to be with glycerine, too, so you don’t get even drier.”
As we speak, Dunn grabs her bedside bottle of Heritage Store Rosewater & Glycerine Hydrating Facial Mist and begins spritzing.
She namechecks Pause Well-Aging products for being “really amazing”; Cerave Skin Renewing Night Cream (“The big tub really did the job,” she says); Aquaphor Advanced Therapy Ointment Body Spray, which is “really nice and doesn’t have tackiness”; and straight-up extra virgin coconut oil.
For hair, she’s “tried it all” and calls Lolavie Perfecting Leave-In “absolutely the best for your newly frizzy, menopausal hair—it works so well.”
5. Flash Periods Are Real
Like that scene in And Just Like That where Charlotte has a “flash period” in a pair of white pants, menstrual bleeding can become erratic.
When Dunn saw the episode.
“I called up Dr. Mary Jane Minkin at Yale, and I said, ‘Is that a medical term, flash period?’
And she said no, but that’s a very common experience.”
When it happened to Dunn, she was on a Vogue assignment in the Bahamas.
While swimming in open water, “I got my period for the first time in, I don’t know how many months, and there was a school of barracuda trailing us!”
she recalls.
“I asked our swim coach, ‘What are those fish behind us?
They look quite large!’
And she said, ‘Oh no, no, no, they’re barracuda, and they’ll stay away unless you’re wearing flashy jewelry or you’re bleeding.’”
Dunn made it back on board to tell the tale.
6.
Seeing a Specialist Is Extremely Helpful
Dunn emphasizes the importance of seeing a menopause specialist.
“Most primary care doctors are trained for an hour, maybe, in menopause, they don’t know very much,” says Dunn.
“Don’t tack it onto your ob-gyn visit—it’s a complex subject that needs more than 10 minutes as you’re about to leave, so make a separate appointment.”
The good news is that certified menopause practitioners are incredibly easy to find on the NAMS (North American Menopause Society) website.
“They’re very rigorous; they have to be recertified every three years, and you can do virtual visits,” says Dunn.
“So many of these practitioners are brilliant researchers, department chairs at Ivy League schools—you can get appointments with people who have 500 research papers, and that is who will be in charge of your menopause case.”
Since there’s no single person to fix every issue, it’s a helpful tool in pooling doctors.
“If you have painful sex, if you have hot flashes, if you’re not sleeping, if your bones are becoming brittle, that’s a lot of different experts,” says Dunn of their knowledge of the latest treatments and medications.
“It’s just heavenly to have someone like that who can develop a detailed treatment plan.”
7.
Many Symptoms Are Temporary
Symptoms can be managed, especially if you talk to someone about them.
“Some women sail through menopause without any symptoms; it’s not always this doom slog,” says Dunn.
For those experiencing the weight of them, though, there’s hope.
Among the many brain researchers that Dunn spoke with, Pauline Maki at the University of Chicago, who has studied menopause and cognition for years, mentioned that her brain fog was not likely to last.
“Brain fog and memory problems are a normal experience through menopause, and then, it goes away,” says Dunn.
“And that is tremendously good news because how often does something come back into your life after it’s gone with your body or brain?
So that I love.”
Today, Dunn is experiencing a different level of symptoms already.
“My hot flashes have almost gone away.
My brain is back.
I know how to manage my skin and hair.
You can get through it with the right tools,” she says.
Also, “It’s fantastic not to have your period anymore.”
So there’s that.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia is a rare and aggressive subtype of acute myeloid leukemia.
The cancer is characterized by an overproduction of immature blood-forming cells (promyelocytes) in the blood and bone marrow.
Eventually, the promyelocytes outnumber the healthy red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets, which can prevent the blood from functioning properly.
Due to groundbreaking treatment advances achieved in recent years, acute promyelocytic leukemia is now considered to be the most curable form of adult leukemia.
Causes of and risk factors for acute promyelocytic leukemia
Acute promyelocytic leukemia is caused by the body’s uncontrolled production of promyelocytes, which results from a gene mutation in a single blood-forming cell.
Specifically, a certain tumor suppressor gene known as the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene on chromosome 15 fuses with the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene on chromosome 17.
The rearrangement of genetic material (translocation) between chromosomes 15 and 17 forms an abnormal fusion gene known as PML/RARa.
Although scientists have not yet identified the precise causes of the genetic mutation that leads to the development of acute promyelocytic leukemia, they have confirmed that the condition is acquired and not inherited.
Signs and symptoms of acute promyelocytic leukemia
A telltale symptom of acute promyelocytic leukemia is coagulopathy, a potentially dangerous disorder that interferes with blood clotting and can lead to excessive bleeding, easy bruising and blood clot formation (thrombosis).
Due to possible shortages of healthy red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets along with abnormal protein levels in the bloodstream, acute promyelocytic leukemia can also cause:
Fever, chills and night sweats (B symptoms)
Muscle weakness and fatigue
Anemia and skin pallor
Loss of appetite
Unintended weight loss
Frequent infections
Pinhead-sized red spots on the skin (petechiae)
Diagnosing acute promyelocytic leukemia
A diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia is usually based on a medical history review, physical examination and lab testing.
If symptoms such as easy bleeding or bruising are present, a physician will typically order a complete blood count (CBC) to evaluate the levels of red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets.
The diagnostic hallmark of acute promyelocytic leukemia is the presence of PML/RARa.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia treatment
Acute promyelocytic leukemia is a medical emergency.
To reduce the risk of complications associated with coagulopathy, such as life-threatening blood clots, treatment should begin as soon as the condition is suspected.
Treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia differs from that of most other types of acute myeloid leukemia.
Usually, it involves the administration of differentiating agents, such as all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA).
These non-chemotherapy drugs target the chromosomal abnormality and destroy the leukemia cells.
Usually, the cancer responds well to the initial phase of treatment (induction therapy) and goes into remission.
During remission, many patients receive consolidation therapy, which may involve:
Additional cycles of ATRA
Traditional chemotherapy
Intrathecal chemotherapy
Transfusions of platelets and blood-clotting factors
After completing consolidation therapy, some high-risk patients continue with maintenance therapy for a few years to help prevent a recurrence.
Maintenance therapy is intermittent and may involve a combination of ATRA and low-dose chemotherapy.
How Moffitt Cancer Center approaches acute promyelocytic leukemia
Moffitt Cancer Center is a high-volume cancer center, and the multispecialty team in our renowned Malignant Hematology Program has acquired extensive experience in diagnosing and treating all forms of leukemia, including relatively uncommon subtypes such as acute promyelocytic leukemia.
We take an individualized approach to cancer care, determining the most appropriate course of action after taking into account the type and stage of the cancer and the patient’s health, preferences and goals.
If you would like to learn more about acute promyelocytic leukemia, you do not need a referral to talk with one of our specialists.
When you request an appointment by calling 1-888-663-3488 or submitting a new patient registration form online.
What do dog skin allergies look like?
“Atopic dermatitis is caused by a combination of genetic factors that alter the skin barrier and a predisposition to [having] an exaggerated immune response to environmental allergies,” Dr. Harbour said.
“This is the same as eczema in people.”
Environmental allergies, such as pollen and dust, can cause atopic dermatitis , Dr. Harbour said.
Dogs can become allergic to their regular food that they’ve already been eating for a long time.
So if your pup has been eating the same food for years, he can suddenly start having allergic reactions to it at any point.
Food allergies in dogs can cause a variety of symptoms, including skin irritation.
If your pup’s allergic to his food, you’ll probably notice gastrointestinal symptoms, such as vomiting, in addition to itching.
Other parasites dogs can be allergic to include intestinal parasites, mites and ticks .
Dogs can be allergic to flea saliva when they get bitten by a flea, and it’s actually a super common allergy in dogs.
Allergic dogs will often itch and lick themselves so much that they get hot spots , and they can develop secondary infections.
There are a lot of things that can cause skin allergies in dogs , such as parasites, food and environmental allergens, Dr. Harbour told The Dodo.
It can be tough to figure out what your dog’s allergic to and how to treat him, though, so we reached out to Dr. Lydia Harbour, a veterinary dermatology resident at Dermatology for Animals in Arizona, to find out more about how to deal with dog skin allergies.
If your dog’s been itching more than usual or if he’s constantly licking himself, he could have allergies.
Dog skin allergy symptoms
Itchy, inflamed skin is the most common symptom of skin allergies in dogs.
“Hair loss, thickened abnormal skin (elephant skin) and crusting associated with a secondary infection are common,” Dr. Harbour said.
Ear infections are often a sign of allergies, too.
If you think your pup might have skin allergies, here are some signs to look for:
Itching
Red skin
Scabs
Secondary skin infections
Hot spots
Fleas or flea dirt in the fur
Hives
Constantly licking
Itching associated with skin allergies is usually concentrated in certain areas of the body.
According to Dr. Harbour, “The most common areas affected are the paws, ears, muzzle, around the eyes, and the hairless areas of the underside.”
Your dog might itch or lick his butt a lot, too, especially if he has worms or fleas.
“Some [dogs] are very itchy without much redness/inflammation in their skin, and other dogs will be very inflamed without being very itchy,” Dr. Harbour said.
“This makes individualized treatment plans very important for the best management possible.
This can start as a seasonal issue that progresses to something more year-round.”
Dog skin allergies treatment
The treatment your pup will need will depend on what’s causing his skin allergy.
Here are some common skin allergy treatments.
Dog food for allergies
If your dog has food allergies, he’ll need to eat special food.
Hypoallergenic dog foods are usually prescribed by vets and contain ingredients that your dog most likely won’t be allergic or sensitive to.
There are a couple types of dog food for allergies: hydrolyzed protein and limited-ingredient diets (LID).
Hydrolyzed protein dog food contains pieces of protein that are so small that your dog’s immune system typically won’t react to them, while limited-ingredient dog foods are made with fewer ingredients than typical food so your pup’s less likely to run into something she’s allergic to.
LIDs are also often made with exotic proteins, like venison or duck, since there’s a better chance your pup’s never eaten them before.
Allergy shots
Allergen-specific immunotherapy (ASIT), or allergy shots for dogs, is a super effective treatment for allergies.
“This works by giving the patient small doses of what the dog is allergic to,” Dr. Harbour said.
“Over time, the immune system starts to change how it responds to the allergen and develops ‘tolerance.’”
Allergy shots are the only treatment that can actually change your dog’s immune system when dealing with environmental allergies.
Other treatments will just help relieve the symptoms.
“Allergies are a lifelong disease, so the earlier that immunotherapy with ASIT is started, the less symptoms that patient will hopefully experience over time,” Dr. Harbour said.
“It's [around] 70 to 80 percent effective, but that's along a spectrum.
Some patients will completely improve, [while] others will have less severe flares.”
Another type of allergy shot that helps with itchy skin is cytopoint.
Like other allergy medications, cytopoint helps with itchy skin, but it doesn’t change your pup’s immune response like immunotherapy does.
“Cytopoint is an anti-itch injection given at the veterinary practice that lasts four to eight weeks,” Dr. Harbour said.
“This is a monoclonal antibody that targets the itch mediator and prevents the signal of itch from going to the brain.”
Prescription medication
Your vet can prescribe allergy medication for your dog.
Common medicines include Apoquel, Atopica and oral steroids.
Shampoo for allergies
You can buy an anti-itch medicated shampoo to relieve your dog’s itchy skin.
Dr. Harbour recommends shampoos that have chlorhexidine, ceramides, and sometimes climbazole, miconazole or ketoconazole.
Try this medicated shampoo from Amazon
Along with the treatment your vet recommends, you should also bathe your dog frequently if he has skin allergies.
“There is a common misconception that you will over–bathe your dog,” Dr. Harbour said.
“While this can be true for normal dogs and while using harsh shampoos, allergic dogs are an exception.”
Antibiotics or antifungals
For secondary skin infections that develop from allergies, your vet might prescribe antibiotics or antifungals.
Omega supplements
Omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids reduce inflammation and improve your dog’s skin health, which can be helpful for pups with skin allergies.
Remove allergens
If you know what your dog’s allergic to, you can remove those allergens from your house.
To do this, you may need to have your dog allergy tested to know what you need to get rid of.
There are a few easy steps you can take in the meantime, though.
You should dust your house frequently so allergens like pollen and dander aren’t sitting around.
Getting a dehumidifier can also help, since it’ll stop mold and mildew from growing and get rid of dust mites.
Try this Frigidaire dehumidifier from Amazon
You can also buy an air purifier.
(Plus, a dehumidifier or an air purifier can also help with your own allergies.)
Try this HEPA filter air purifier from Chewy
Don’t worry if your pup has skin allergies.
There are plenty of treatment options that can help relieve his symptoms and get him feeling better.
We independently pick all the products we recommend because we love them and think you will too.
If you buy a product from a link on our site, we may earn a commission.
Share on Pinterest A new treatment uses stem cells to generate dopamine and reverse Parkinson’s disease symptoms in rats.
MarianVejcik/Getty Images Parkinson’s disease damages a specific class of neurons located in the midbrain.
This robs the brain of dopamine, a neurotransmitter that helps control movement.
In a new study, researchers describe a process for transforming non-neuronal cells into functioning neurons.
Neural grafts in rats reverse motor symptoms caused by Parkinson’s disease.
More than 10 million people worldwide have Parkinson’s disease (PD), according to the Parkinson’s Foundation.
A progressive neurodegenerative disorder, PD damages or destroys neurons located in the midbrain.
These neurons produce dopamine, a neurotransmitter that plays a role in movement.
This lack of dopamine causes PD symptoms which include tremors, stiffness, and impaired balance and coordination.
Treatment with the drug L-Dopa can replenish the brain’s dopamine to alleviate some symptoms.
However, continued use of the drug can cause dyskinesia or involuntary body movements.
The scientific community is working tirelessly to develop more effective ways to treat and understand PD.
In a new study, published in the journal npj Regenerative Medicine , researchers reveal that they reversed motor symptoms of PD in rats by implanting induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) to replace neurons destroyed by the disease.
iPSC are cells that have been reprogrammed back into an embryonic-like state.
This state allowed the scientists to treat the cells and differentiate them into dopamine-producing neurons.
“It’s like taking a book, and then washing away the ink, and then being able to rewrite what that book is,” explained Dr. James Beck, senior vice president and chief scientific officer for the Parkinson’s Foundation — a nonprofit organization that works to improve the lives of people with PD and advance research toward a cure.
When implanted into the brains of rats, the cells used in the study were able to send out branching fibers to make connections in the brain and produce dopamine.
Establishing parameters With their study, the researchers investigated the most successful protocol for transforming non-neuronal cells into functioning neurons.
“The purpose of this article is to establish the parameters that make these cells the best,” Dr. Jeffrey Kordower, director of the ASU-Banner Neurodegenerative Disease Research Center at Arizona State University told Medical News Today.
The researchers treated the cells in their embryonic-like state with a set of additional factors and cultured the cells for 17, 24, and 37 days.
“[T]hat’s where this study plays a key role, in just trying to take a look at several time points in order to see when […] the development of these cells might produce the best results,” Dr. Beck told MNT.
The “magic” number turned out to be 17.
“If you treat and culture them for 17 days, and then stop their divisions and differentiate them, that works best,” Dr. Kordower said.
These cells, when grafted into the brains of rats, “have the ability to grow long distances,” Dr. Kordower said.
That’s important, Dr. Kordower explained, because the cells will eventually be implanted into humans where they will need to send their branches over long distances.
Recovery may be dose-dependent As part of the study, researchers also looked at the dosing of iPSC, a factor that has not been studied before, according to Dr. Kordower.
That’s important, Dr. Beck explained to MNT, because neurosurgeons need to know how many cells to implant in the brain.
“Having fewer cells is better because you can minimize any potential side effects […] but the flip side is, if you don’t have enough in there, you’re not going to see the effect you want,” Dr. Beck said.
“When you put in a few cells, let’s say put in 5,000, you don’t get any functional recovery,” Dr. Kordower told MNT.
“You put in 10,000, you get more.
And, if you put in even more cells, the functional recovery is faster and more robust.”
“And then if you put in the maximum feasible dose, which is 450,000 cells, by 4 months, there’s complete and functional recovery
[in rats].”
– Dr. Kordower The researchers also demonstrate with their study that the treatment is safe in rodents, according to Dr. Kordower.
“In every animal, we look to make sure that tumors aren’t forming,” he said.
“And we never see that.
There are a few cells that are dividing, but very few […] It’s non-troublesome and non-worrisome.
So in this study, we’re able to demonstrate the right way to proceed.”
Diabetes type 2: Dr Zoe Williams discusses high blood sugar risks
Diabetes is a common condition that affects more than four million people in the UK, and 90 percent of all cases are caused by type 2 diabetes.
You could be at risk of high blood sugar if you develop painful sores on your feet, it's been revealed.
Trending
Type 2 diabetes could be caused by the body not producing enough of the hormone insulin, or the body not reacting to insulin.
Without enough of the hormone, the body struggled to convert sugar in the blood into useable energy.
It's crucial that if you think you may have diabetes, you speak to a doctor as soon as possible.
You may be at risk of the condition if you notice some changes to the skin on your feet.
READ MORE: Type 2 diabetes symptoms - the major sign in your thighs
Diabetes type 2 symptoms: High blood sugar signs include having painful sores on your feet
"Constantly feeling thirsty, weeing all the time and feeling really tired; these are all symptoms that should lead us to think about diabetes," warned Benenden Health's society matron, Cheryl Lythgoe.
She told Express Health: "However, when it comes to diabetes, there are many other symptoms that should be getting our attention too.
"For example, if you struggle with one infection after another - a wound infection that won’t settle or a fungal infection such as thrush or athlete's foot, for example – this could be a symptom of diabetes.
"All of these signs and symptoms could be an indicator of diabetes and would require a discussion and some testing with your GP.
"
SUBSCRIBE Invalid email We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you.
This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding.
You can unsubscribe at any time.
Read our Privacy Policy
Diabetes type 2 symptoms: Speak to a doctor if you're worried about the signs of diabetes
READ MORE Diabetes type 2 - the ‘diabetes superfood’ dinner you should eat But, just because you have athlete's foot, it doesn't necessarily mean that you have diabetes.
It's a very common condition, and there are a number of over-the-counter treatments to get rid of the infection.
The treatments usually take a few weeks to work, and you may need to try a few different treatments to find the one that works for you.
Your athlete's foot is more likely to be caused by diabetes if you have any of the more common symptoms.
A woman with her head in her hands/Courtesy of Shutterstock
Despite positive results Monday from a Phase III trial of KarXT (xanomeline-trospium) and analysts’ recommendations to buy, Karuna Therapeutics’ stock dropped more than 19% in 48 hours this week.
Safety and tolerability remained consistent with the prior Phase II and III results, according to Karuna.
Hence, analysts who spoke with BioSpace were surprised to see the selloff that ensued following the data drop.
Data from Karuna’s second Phase III trial of KarXT, a muscarinic agonist, again met its primary endpoint for improving symptom severity in schizophrenia.
Patients in the KarXT arm of the trial scored 8.4 points lower than their placebo counterparts on the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS).
This was slightly less than the nearly 10 point-difference seen in the previous Phase III trial.
“It’s probably one of the most exciting developments in a very long time in serious mental illness,” Philip D. Harvey, professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, told BioSpace.
These results follow promising efficacy data from Phase II, marking three studies in a row to hit their targets—a rare occurrence in the industry, Harvey said.
The drug is now in studies to analyze its effects when added to other treatments, such as antipsychotics.
Still, Karuna saw its stock drop 16% Monday from investor selloff, then continued to drop after the company announced a $400 million capital raise.
The continued drop makes sense, Graig Suvannavejh, managing director and senior biopharmaceuticals and biotechnology equity research analyst at Mizuho, told BioSpace.
Nearly anytime a company announces it is issuing stock to raise capital; the price goes down, he said.
However, the initial decline suggests the Phase III data raised questions for investors.
“This is what the investor world does … hem and haw over the smallest details and find a reason to nitpick,” Suvannavejh said.
He speculated on three likely causes for the dip:
Trial miss on the secondary endpoint
Concern over cardiovascular risk
Potential commercial delay as the company gathers additional data concerning that risk
Secondary Miss in Negative Symptoms
While KarXT hit the trial’s primary endpoint of overall reducing schizophrenia symptoms, it missed a secondary endpoint of specifically decreasing negative symptoms compared to the placebo at week four.
Negative symptoms include apathy, difficulty speaking and withdrawal from social life and interests—up to 60% of patients with schizophrenia experience at least one negative symptom.
Currently, there is no FDA-approved drug for these symptoms; all current drugs for schizophrenia treat positive symptoms relating to psychosis.
KarXT’s biggest competitor is Cerevel Therapeutics’ lead asset, emraclidine.
Cerevel is currently in Phase II trials, about two years behind Karuna, by Suvannavejh’s calculations.
The ability to also treat negative symptoms could have potentially been a differentiator for Karuna’s drug Suvannavejh said, potentially dimming investor excitement.
“I think it’s a very solid study,” Suvannavejh said.
“But investors are 'investors.'”
Yatin Suneja, a biotech analyst at Guggenheim Partners, noted that while the miss may have affected stock prices this week, it shouldn’t affect approval.
“Negative didn’t hit, but that doesn’t matter because the drug is going to be approved for schizophrenia, not for negative symptoms,” he told BioSpace.
Cardiovascular Concerns
Another potential concern among investors is KarXT’s safety profile, Suvannavejh said.
The latest Phase III trial showed an increased rate of hypertension - 6% in the treatment arm versus 2% in the placebo.
No participants discontinued treatment due to hypertension.
Karuna will launch a small cardiovascular safety study, specifically measuring ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring (ABPM), in April 2022 to determine whether a cardiac risk is present.
Meanwhile, Cerevel completed an ABPM trial in December 2022 that resulted in what it called clear evidence that emraclidine does not induce hypertension.
Cerevel had also seen some outlier cardiovascular signals in its earlier study and ran this study at the FDA’s request.
Harvey noted that the origin of the cardiac issues is a target emraclidine and KarXT share, making the Cerevel data relevant to Karuna’s drug.
Suvannavejh agreed: “My prediction is [KarXT is] going to look fine on cardiovascular safety.”
Potential Delay to Approval
Karuna did not respond to BioSpace’s request for comment before publication and stated it is on target to submit a New Drug Application (NDA) for KarXT by mid-2023.
With that timeline, the results of the ABPM study will come after the NDA submission.
The FDA would then determine if this information would count as a major amendment, which could add a three-month delay to the review process.
“Time is of the essence because [Karuna and Cerevel] are competing to be first on the market,” Suneja said.
In the meantime, Karuna continues to add to its safety database by running further trials to assess long-term safety, tolerability and efficacy.
As of Friday morning pre-market, the stock has rebounded 8% from Tuesday’s close.
Study population
The REACT-1 study has been tracking the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in the general population of England from 1 May 2020 to 31 March 2022.
The study protocol and methodology have been published;2,22 briefly, every 4–6 weeks, recruitment letters were sent to a random, nationally representative sample of people aged 5 years and over in England, using the National Health Service patient register.
Participants then obtained self-administered throat and nasal swabs for SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing and completed an online or telephone questionnaire which included questions on demographic variables, behaviour, and recent symptoms.
Questionnaires for each of the 19 completed rounds since May 2020 are available on the study website (https://www.imperial.ac.uk/medicine/research-and-impact/groups/react-study/for-researchers/react-1-study-materials/).
Between 95,000 and 175,000 viable swabs and valid responses were gathered each round, with respondents unaware of their test result at the time of their response.
Participants were asked whether they experienced any of a list of 26 potential COVID-19 symptoms in the week prior to their test.
These included loss or change of sense of smell or taste, respiratory/cardiac symptoms (new persistent cough, chest pain, tight chest, shortness of breath), cold-like symptoms (runny nose, blocked nose, sneezing, sore throat, hoarse voice, sore eyes), influenza-like symptoms (fever, chills, muscle aches, headache), gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea/vomiting, abdominal pain/belly ache, diarrhoea, appetite loss), fatigue-related symptoms (tiredness, severe fatigue, difficulty sleeping), and others (dizziness, heavy arms or legs, numbness/tingling).
We split data from 15 rounds of REACT-1 between 19 June 2020 and 31 March 2022 into distinct phases that correspond with the dominance of different SARS-CoV-2 variants in England: rounds 2–7 (at approximately monthly intervals between 19 June and 3 December 2020), when wild-type was dominant; rounds 8–10 (between 6 January and 29 March 2021), when Alpha (B.1.1.7) was dominant; rounds 13–15 (between 24 June and 5 November 2021), when Delta (B.1.617.2) was dominant; and rounds 17–19 (between 5 January and 31 March 2022), when Omicron (B.1.1.529) was dominant.
In rounds 17–19 we use sequencing data to identify those participants who were infected with BA.1 or BA.2.
Round 1 is excluded because the symptom questions asked were not consistent with subsequent rounds.
Rounds 11, 12 and 16 are excluded from analysis because they occurred at times when two variants were competing for dominance in the population23.
Adults aged 18 years and over were included in the analysis.
A total of 266,847 participants were excluded because of missing symptom data (see supplementary methods for more details on data exclusions), and 38 were excluded because of missing age or sex data resulting in a final study population, after exclusions, of 1,542,510 participants.
Statistical analyses
We used univariable logistic regression models to estimate the risk of PCR swab-positivity for each variant conditional on experiencing each of the 26 symptoms.
Models were adjusted for age group, sex, and self-reported vaccination status (coded as the number of vaccines received).
Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals are reported for each symptom and each variant.
We also conducted a pooled analysis in which we tested the interactions between variants and each symptom in relation to PCR positivity, while additionally adjusting for calendar time, to assess the effect of differing SARS-CoV-2 prevalence and background symptom prevalence on the estimated odds ratios.
Variable selection models were trained on 70% of the data set, with 30% held back for model performance evaluation (see Supplementary Methods).
We used stability selection applied to least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) penalised logistic regression, with swab positivity as the binary outcome variable, and the 26 symptoms as predictors.
To adjust for age, sex and vaccination status, these were included as unpenalised variables.
The regression coefficients for selected symptoms were constrained to non-negative values.
LASSO models were fit on 1000 random 50% subsamples of the 70% training data.
The proportion of models in which each symptom was selected is taken as a measure of variable importance.
The threshold in selection proportion for final variable selection was calibrated in conjunction with the LASSO penalty parameter using an internal stability score24.
BA.2 vs BA.1
Omicron BA.2 and BA.1 lineages were determined using viral genome sequencing on swab-positive swabs from rounds 17–19.
We compared the symptom profiles among (BA.2 or BA.1) swab-positive individuals using logistic regression with BA.2 vs BA.1 as the binary outcome variable and each of the 26 symptoms as explanatory variables, adjusted on age group, sex, vaccination status and round.
As a sensitivity analysis, we 1:1 matched swab-positive participants with BA.2 or BA.1 on age group (±5 years), sex, vaccination status and round in rounds 17–19, and conducted conditional logistic regression with BA.2 vs BA.1 as the binary outcome variable.
We also used log-linear regression to compare symptom burden, in terms of number of symptoms experienced over the disease course, in double- and triple-vaccinated individuals with Omicron BA.2 and BA.1
(Supplementary Methods).
Severity of symptoms
To assess whether there are differences in symptom severity between BA.2 and BA.1 independent of vaccination history we took a subset of swab-positive individuals with sequence-confirmed BA.2 or BA.1 who had received second or third vaccines at least two weeks before their PCR test.
In this group, we used logistic regression to compare the risk of reporting symptoms that affected their daily activities ‘a lot’ vs ‘a little’ or ‘not at all’ in people infected with BA.2 vs BA.1.
We adjusted for age, sex, vaccine boosted (y/n), days since most recent vaccination, prior COVID-19 (28 days or more before test date), time since symptom onset, and calendar time (to account for seasonal effects).
Odds ratios were reported for sequential models, with additional covariates added incrementally in the order described.
We also used the same subset of individuals to model symptom count using multivariable log-linear regression models, again adding covariates sequentially and reporting odds ratios.
Ct values
Finally, we investigated the relationship between N-gene Ct value and symptom profile among swab positive individuals in rounds 17–19 (>95% Omicron), using linear regression models with Ct value as the outcome variable and each symptom separately as the independent variable.
We also compared Ct values between swab-positive individuals with BA.2 or BA.1 using an unpaired Wilcoxon test, and compared Ct values in those excluded from analysis because of missing symptom data.
Finally, we used linear regression to associate Ct values with time since symptom onset, in individuals with BA.2 or BA.1.
Sensitivity analyses
To assess possible biases introduced by non-continuous sampling, which might capture different stages of symptom onset for different variants, we (i) investigated the distributions of ‘days since symptom onset’ for different variants, (ii) investigated the relationship between symptom burden, in terms of number of symptoms reported, and days since symptom onset, and (iii) repeated the main analysis, further adjusting for time since symptom onset in the models.
Data collection and software
All data collection was captured with Questback (Sprint 2020 Installation).
Data were analysed using R version 4.0.525.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Blood test results explained
A blood test – sometimes referred to as a blood panel – is a laboratory examination of a blood sample used to check for a variety of things, including the functioning of certain organs (such as the liver, kidneys, thyroid and heart), infections and certain genetic disorders, as well as to assess an individual’s general health.
After the sample has been analyzed in the lab and the results compiled, a blood test report will in most cases be supplied to the testee.
The report details the various components in the blood and at what level they are present.
For those from non-medical backgrounds, the reports provided following blood tests can be complex and difficult to decipher.
Blood test abbreviations
Blood test results generally use the metric system of measurement and various abbreviations, including: cmm: cells per cubic millimeter
cells per cubic millimeter fL (femtoliter): fraction of one-millionth of a liter
fraction of one-millionth of a liter g/dL: grams per deciliter
grams per deciliter IU/L: international units per liter
international units per liter mEq/L: milliequivalent per liter
milliequivalent per liter mg/dL: milligrams per deciliter
milligrams per deciliter mL: milliliter
milliliter mmol/L: millimoles per liter
millimoles per liter ng/mL: nanograms per milliliter
nanograms per milliliter pg (picograms): one-trillionth of a gram People worried about their health can also use the free Ada app to carry out a symptom assessment.
Or find out more about how our symptom checker works before you try it for yourself.
Blood test results components
A blood test is typically composed of three main tests: a complete blood count, a metabolic panel and a lipid panel.
Each test for different things, which can be understood through a detailed analysis of the results.
Confusingly, it is likely that the results of the three tests will not be differentiated from each other and, instead, will be listed under one large column, often labelled “Test Name”.
Within each are various sub-tests, which altogether give a broad picture of an individual’s health.
Complete blood count (CBC)
The complete blood count (CBC) concentrates on the three types of blood cells: white blood cells (WBCs), red blood cells (RBCs) and platelets.
By measuring the volume of blood cells, the CBC allows a doctor to evaluate an individual’s overall health, as well as check for underlying conditions such as leukemia and anemia.
The subtests within the CBC are:
White blood cell (WBC) count
Also known as leukocytes, white blood cells are a major component of the body’s immune system.
A high white blood cell count can indicate the presence of infection, while a low count can point towards various conditions, including HIV, leukemia, hepatitis and arthritis.
Read more about a White Blood Cell Count »
Differential white blood cell count
The lab tests the five main components of white blood cells and their proportion to each other.
If the components are out of balance, this could indicate an infection, as well as a variety of medical conditions.
Healthy proportions for each are: Neutrophils: 40 to 60 percent of the total
40 to 60 percent of the total Lymphocytes: 20 to 40 percent
20 to 40 percent Monocytes: 2 to 8 percent
2 to 8 percent Eosinophiles: 1 to 4 percent
1 to 4 percent Basophils: 0.5 to 1 percent
Red blood cell (RBC) count
Red blood cells (RBCs) carry oxygen to tissues throughout the body, making them important to its healthy functioning.
A red blood cell count estimates the volume of RBCs within an individual – if the results show a count above or below normal levels this can indicate various medical conditions to a doctor.
However, this form of testing is unable to pinpoint the root causes of any irregularities, meaning, if this is the case, further tests will be necessary.
Hematocrit (Hct) test
Tests what proportion of the blood is made up of RBCs.
It is useful in diagnosing anemia, among other medical conditions.
Hemoglobin (Hgb) test
Hemoglobin is a protein contained within red RBCs that sends oxygen from the lungs to the body’s tissues.
The hemoglobin test is also useful in diagnosing anemia, with many practitioners preferring this test over the hematocrit test.
Read more about Hemoglobin Levels ».
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) test
The average volume of RBCs, or the space each red blood cell fills, is measured through this test.
Results outside of the normal range can be a sign of anemia or chronic fatigue syndrome, among other medical conditions.
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) test
The lab tests the average amount of hemoglobin present in each red blood cell.
High levels are a possible indicator of anemia and low levels a possible sign of malnutrition.
Red cell distribution width (RDW or RCDW) test
Tests the distribution of RBCs, not their actual size.
Levels outside of the normal range can indicate conditions such as anemia, malnutrition and liver disease.
Platelet count
Platelets are small cells that help the blood to clot.
This test measures the amount of platelets present in the blood.
If testing highlights a high count, this can indicate anemia, cancer or infection, while a low count can prevent wounds from healing and result in severe bleeding.
Mean platelet volume (MPV)
Tests the volume of platelets in the blood.
A low platelet volume can cause irregularities with bleeding, while a high platelet volume can increase an individual’s risk of heart attack or stroke.
Comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP)
The comprehensive metabolic panel test, also known as a chemistry panel, measures the body’s glucose levels, fluid and electrolyte balance, as well as liver and kidney function.
It consists of a number of sub-tests:
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) test
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) is an enzyme mostly produced by liver cells.
High levels can be an indication of liver damage.
Albumin test
Albumin is a protein produced by the liver.
Its volume within the organ can be measured via this test.
Abnormal levels can be caused by liver or kidney problems.
Total protein test
The lab tests the ratio of two types of proteins: albumin and globulin.
Low protein levels can indicate various conditions, including liver and kidney disorders and malnutrition, while high levels can be a sign of inflammation, infection or bone marrow disorder.
Alkaline phosphatase test
Alkaline phosphatase is an enzyme typically produced in liver and bone cells.
Results outside of the normal levels can signal liver damage and bone problems such as rickets or bone tumors.
Aspartate aminotransferase test
Aspartate aminotransferase is an enzyme usually found in RBCs and muscle tissue, as well as the heart, pancreas, liver and kidneys.
This test measures the levels of this enzyme in the body, with results above the healthy range indicating a variety of conditions, including some types of cancer, as well as liver, heart or kidney damage.
Bilirubin test
Bilirubin is a biomarker to test for kidney and liver dysfunction which is useful in diagnosing conditions such as neonatal jaundice, anemia and liver diseases.
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) test
This test measures the volume of nitrogen in the blood.
High levels can be caused by kidney damage or disease, while low levels may be a sign of malnutrition or severe liver damage.
Calcium test
This test measures the levels of calcium in the blood.
If testing indicates low levels, this can indicate under-active parathyroid glands, insufficient calcium in your diet, or Vit D insufficiency, and other less common conditions.
High levels can indicate conditions including over-active parathyroid glands, excessive Vit D supplementation, kidney problems as well as more concerning causes that usually require further investigation.
Proper interpretation of calcium levels often requires testing of other parameters such as total serum protein and albumin.
Chloride test
This test measures the body’s chloride levels.
An increased level of chloride can indicate dehydration as well as kidney disorders and adrenal gland dysfunction.
Creatinine test
Creatinine is a chemical waste molecule that is important for creating muscle energy.
Increased levels of creatinine can be a sign of kidney dysfunction.
Fasting blood sugar test
Blood sugar levels are easily affected by recent food or drink intake.
The fasting blood sugar test is therefore done after a minimum of six hours of fasting.
Abnormal results can indicate diabetes, among other medical conditions.
Phosphorus test
The lab tests the amount of phosphorus in the blood.
Elevated levels can indicate problems with the kidneys and parathyroid glands, and they may be a sign of malnutrition or alcohol abuse.
Potassium test
Potassium aids the communication between nerves and muscles, regulates the heart and maintains muscle function.
Diuretics (a substance or medication used to increase urination) can cause potassium levels to fall.
Sodium test
Sodium is a mineral that aids nerve impulses and muscle contractions, as well as balancing water levels.
Irregularities are a possible indication of dehydration, adrenal gland disorders, corticosteroids, and kidney or liver disorders.
Lipid panel
The lipid panel consists of various tests used to measure the different types of triglycerides (fats) and cholesterol in the blood.
Total cholesterol test
This test measures the overall levels of LDL (bad) and HDL (good) cholesterol in the blood.
Triglycerides test
Tests for triglycerides, a fat found in the blood.
Irregularities are a possible risk factor for heart disease and other medical conditions.
HDL cholesterol test
HDL cholesterol, also known as high-density lipoprotein (or good cholesterol), is useful in protecting against heart disease.
Low levels can increase the risk of heart problems.
LDL cholesterol test
LDL cholesterol, also known as low-density lipoprotein (or bad cholesterol), is linked to heart disease and clogged arteries.
Total cholesterol to HDL ratio test
Calculating this ratio can help determine an individual’s risk of developing a heart disease.
It is worked out by dividing HDL cholesterol into total cholesterol.
High levels are a possible indicator of heart problems.
Shingles: Symptoms and effects of virus
Shingles describes a viral infection that causes a painful rash.
Triggered by the same virus that causes chickenpox, shingles can occur later in life.
According to research, one in three adults will go on to develop this painful condition.
As medicine works best when taken within the first three days of the infection, being able to identify the symptoms could help.
Although it’s probably been years since you battled chickenpox, the same virus called varicella-zoster also causes shingles.
Once you’ve had the disease characteristic for childhood, the virus stays inactive in nerve tissue near your spinal cord and brain.
With years passing, the virus can reactivate and reappear as shingles.
Apart from the tell-tale rash, your tummy might also ring the alarm bells.
READ MORE: Cancer warning: Popular UK drink can cause 'several types' of cancer - 'strong agreement'
Shingles: Symptoms include nausea – Can get ‘mistaken for something else’.
Trending
READ MORE David Harbour: Stranger Things actor has bipolar disorder Instead of vomiting, patients may experience sharp stomach pains, diarrhoea and queasiness.
However, nausea is linked to a variety of other conditions, including flu.
The health portal shares one “key differentiator” that could help tell shingles apart from the virus.
It explains that nausea that precedes shingles isn’t accompanied by a fever unlike when you have flu.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), another sign linked to shingles and tummy is an upset stomach.
READ MORE: David Harbour: Stranger Things actor on being sent to an ‘institution’ for mental health
SUBSCRIBE Invalid email We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you.
This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding.
You can unsubscribe at any time.
Read our Privacy Policy
Instead of vomiting, patients may experience sharp stomach pains, diarrhoea and queasiness.
READ MORE Shingles symptoms:
Two warning signs in your vision Although tummy signs could be pointing to shingles, there are also other symptoms that could help identify the condition.
The warning signs of the infection include: Pain, burning, numbness or tingling
Sensitivity to touch
A red rash that begins a few days after the pain
Fluid-filled blisters that break open and crust over
Itching.
According to the Mayo Clinic, shingles rash will usually impact only a small part of one side of your body.
Generally, the painful sign usually crops up a single-stripe around either the left or the right side of your body.
Fortunately, shingles vaccination can help cut your risk of developing shingles.
In this episode of The Vitals, Shawna Douglas, BSN, RN, a head and neck oncology nurse navigator with Allegheny Health Network, highlights the unique challenges that this population faces, including access to proper dental care, nutrition specialists, and postsurgery speech and swallow therapy.
She draws from personal experience to share a story of how she used the resources available at her institution to help a patient find transportation to and from her appointment—highlighting the value that nurse navigators can provide their patients.
Episode Highlights
“My role as their oncology navigator is to help be that one point of contact and to guide them through their cancer journey.
I provide additional information resources, referrals, and support.”
Time stamp (TS) 1:49
“They always need a dietician to follow them,
[they may have] possible feeding tube considerations,
[and] they always need to see a dentist regardless of treatment options.
Patients also need that dental clearance if they are going to be receiving radiation to the head and neck.
Stemming from the dental evaluation, a lot of our patients need to see an oral surgeon for some extractions.”
TS 3:41
“There are sometimes issues with noncompliance because there are so many appointments that need to be scheduled.
They get very overwhelmed.
That's where I come in.”
TS 4:37
Articles
Videos
The Vitals Podcasts
The most common symptom of Lyme disease is the so-called bullseye rash, or erythema migrans rash.
Often the first sign of Lyme disease, the oval-shape rash spreads gradually from the site of the tick bite in a widening circle.
It forms within seven days after an individual is bitten, on average, and can persist for several weeks.
Around 70% to 80% of Lyme disease patients have such a rash .
However, some people who have the rash may not notice it, said Dr. Gary Wormser , the chief of the Division of Infectious Diseases and head of the Lyme Disease Center at New York Medical College in Valhalla, New York.
"It is not particularly itchy or painful in most patients.
If you do not look at your body that frequently, you may miss it," Wormser told Live Science.
The rash usually clears up on its own in about four weeks, but the bacteria causing the infection linger even after the bullseye disappears, Wormser said.
Lyme disease patients who do not get treated right away may have other symptoms as the bacteria spread through the bloodstream.
Days to weeks after the tick bite, individuals may experience fever, fatigue, aches and pains, Wormser said.
According to Johns Hopkins, headache, neck stiffness, swollen glands and poor appetite can also occur at this stage of infection.
These symptoms often disappear on their own, leading individuals to think they are no longer sick, Wormser said.
Related: 9 out of 10 ticks in this Pennsylvania park carried a potentially fatal neurological virus
Eventually, new, more severe symptoms can emerge, but they may do so weeks, months or years after the initial bite.
These symptoms stem from inflammation in the heart, eye and nerve tissues and can include heart rate abnormalities, red eye, and weakness and paralysis of the facial muscles (Bell's palsy).
People may develop arthritis months to years after the initial tick bite.
And in the late stages of the disease people may have neurological problems such as numbness or tingling in the extremities, memory loss and confusion, Johns Hopkins states.
The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) has decided against the reclassification of Aquiette 2.5mg Tablets from a prescription-only medicine (POM) to a pharmacy (P) medicine.
This follows a review of an application to reclassify the product and the conclusion of a public consultation.
Patients can still access the medicine with a prescription from a qualified healthcare professional.
Aquiette, which contains the active ingredient oxybutynin, is used for the treatment of long-term symptoms of overactive bladder (OAB) in women aged between 18 and 65, such as the urgent need to urinate and frequent urination without pain.
The consultation received an overwhelming number of responses and flagged concerns from patients, healthcare professionals and key stakeholders such as the Royal Pharmaceutical Society and the British Medical Association about the benefits and risks of reclassification.
Patient responses also provided valuable insights and feedback on the impact of patient access.
The MHRA conducted a thorough review of safety data and sought independent advice from the Commission on Human Medicines (CHM).
The review process considered all available evidence, including the responses received in the consultation, on the safety of Aquiette.
The assessment of the reclassification application concluded that a medical prescription continues to be required to ensure the safe use of Aquiette.
An OAB diagnosis requires medical supervision to ensure that the correct treatment is received, and other health conditions are not overlooked or left untreated.
The decision to maintain Aquiette as a POM ensures that the medication is used safely and appropriately under medical supervision.
The MHRA is committed to listening to patient voices and continuously reviews data to improve access to medicines where it is safe to do so.
Aquiette, and other medicines which contain oxybutynin, are safe to use and will still be available on prescription.
Dr Laura Squire, MHRA Chief Healthcare Quality and Access Officer, said:
“Last April we announced a consultation on whether Aquiette 2.5mg could be made available without a prescription.
“After taking on board the views of the many patients and healthcare professionals who responded, we have decided to refuse the reclassification of Aquiette 2.5mg Tablets for women with symptoms of overactive bladder (OAB).
“Independent advice from the Commission on Human Medicines (CHM), our own robust review of the available safety data and the overwhelming responses from our consultation were invaluable in helping us understand that Aquiette still meets the criteria for prescription-only status.
An OAB diagnosis and the correct treatment for this condition require medical supervision.
“We remain committed to improving access to medicines where it is safe to do so and want to reassure patients that Aquiette is safe to use under medical supervision.
It is important that patients continue taking their medication and speak to their GP or healthcare professional if they have any concerns about their prescription.”
Further information
Home > News Havana Syndrome Is the Mystery Illness Afflicting U.S. Government Representatives By Chris Barilla Sep. 21 2021, Published 1:10 p.m. ET Source: Getty Images
It seems as though the world can't go a day now without the mention of some type of illness that threatens the lives of its inhabitants.
Although the COVID-19 pandemic is still raging worldwide, there appears to be another mystery illness that is concerning some, and the majority of those afflicted with it appear to be U.S. government representatives.
Article continues below advertisement
Article continues below advertisement
This mystery illness is called Havana syndrome, and a new case of it seems to have emerged from a CIA officer who was visiting India recently.
So, what exactly are the symptoms of Havana syndrome, and what do we know about where it originated?
Keep reading to find out.
Source: Getty Images CIA director William Burns
Article continues below advertisement
What are the symptoms of Havana syndrome?
There are a few key ones to look out for.
Little is known as of now about Havana syndrome and exactly what brings it about in humans, but it appears to disrupt normal brain function and cause a slew of concerning symptoms among the afflicted.
These symptoms, per NBC, include vertigo, dizziness, fatigue, nausea, and intense headaches.
Those who have the condition have reported it as feeling akin to being hit with an invisible blast, and have even led some who had it to be unable to work anymore.
Another reported symptom that some who have Havana syndrome reported is hearing certain sounds without there being any actual discernible noise present.
The root cause of these concerning feelings by the afflicted is still yet to be determined by investigators and scientists looking to get to the bottom of it all.
Article continues below advertisement
So what exactly is Havana syndrome?
Like its name suggests, it first appeared in Cuba in 2016.
Scientists and government officials are still working to figure out exactly what Havana syndrome is, and as of right now little is known about the illness.
The first cases of Havana syndrome appeared in Havana in 2016, where U.S. and Canadian representatives to Cuba reported the aforementioned symptoms.
In the time since being discovered, all of those who have faced the illness have been government workers, CIA agents, and their families.
Source: Getty Images
Article continues below advertisement
However, there are a few theories about the origin of Havana syndrome, albeit not scientifically proven ones.
Initially, officials believed that the Cuban government was involved in it, but that theory faded as cases spread to virtually every continent where agents were stationed worldwide.
Now, scientists are speculating that it all has something to do with microwaves.
Not the devices that warm up food, but literal microwaves blasted into the sky.
Per the BBC, the use of microwaves in espionage dates back to the Cold War, and both the U.S. and Russia experimented with the technology in an effort to disrupt human brain function and even cause death in subjects.
There have been reported cases in places such as Russia, China, and Cuba, which all have had or currently have a Russian government presence.
Although it hasn't been confirmed by the State Department, the generally accepted theory as of now is that Russia is largely behind it all.
Article continues below advertisement
Nonetheless, the true power of Havana syndrome at the moment lies in its mystery, and that mystery is making it increasingly dangerous for government officials to operate overseas.
Until a true cause of it can be determined, it will likely continue to undermine U.S. intelligence operations worldwide and scare off anyone who fears the long-term implications of contracting it.
Source: Getty Images
Article continues below advertisement
Most recently, a CIA agent working in India reported having symptoms of Havana syndrome.
According to CNN, a CIA representative who accompanied the agency's director, William Burns, on a trip to India recently reported symptoms consistent with Havana syndrome.
This instance marks the second time in less than a month that agents traveling with top Biden administration officials have come down with the mystery illness.
In August, Vice President Kamala Harris' visit to Vietnam had to be delayed when multiple members of her team also reported symptoms consistent with the illness.
Burns and the director of national intelligence, Avril Haines, are allegedly in the midst of an in-depth sweep to weed out potential causes behind the uptick in cases among traveling representatives this summer.
This situation is cause for concern among government representatives, as it remains unknown how a would-be assailant caught wind of Burns' trip to India to begin with.
CatChicken game
The CatChicken20 game was utilized to measure children’s response and gaze movement during a Go/NoGo task.
The Go/NoGo task was used to measure a person’s inhibitory control; a subject should respond to the Go stimulus but inhibit their action towards the NoGo stimulus8.
The game represented the Go and NoGo stimuli as “Chicken” and “Cat” characters, respectively.
A stimulus appeared randomly in one of nine locations for a fixed duration of time (Fig. 4).
The interval between two consecutive stimuli was set by configuring the minimum and maximum waiting-time values.
Figure 4 Game interface of the CatChicken system.
(A) Nine red flowers representing the locations in which a stimulus can appear; (B) Go and (C) NoGo characters.
Full size image
The system outputted the user’s response types and time, and stimulus and eye locations on the monitor (Fig. 5).
A user responded to the stimulus by pressing the spacebar.
The system categorized a subject’s response as one of four types: Go-positive if the subject responded to the Go character; Go-negative if they missed it; NoGo-positive if they inhibited their action in response to the NoGo character; NoGo-negative if they reacted to it.
Different audio feedback was given when the subject responded correctly and incorrectly towards the stimulus.
The system was equipped with a Tobii 4C eye tracker that recorded the user’s eye position on the monitor continuously.
The eye tracker sampling rate was 90 Hz (interlaced), and its operating distance was 50 cm to 95 cm.
The stimulus and eye locations on the monitor were normalized to the unit interval [0, 1] by dividing the pixel coordinates by the window’s coordinate length.
Figure 5 Information measured by the CatChicken system.
While playing the Go/NoGo game, CatChicken records children’s response types and times, and locations of stimulus and gaze over time.
The response types are Go-positive (green), NoGo-positive (blue), Go-negative (orange), and NoGo-negative (red).
The values of object and gaze locations are normalized to range from 0 to 1.
Full size image
Participants
Participants involved 22 autism spectrum disorder children (16 male and 6 female) and 35 typical children (24 male and 11 female) with an average age of five years from two local schools in Japan (Table 5).
All ASD subjects attended special education school and had been diagnosed by clinicians; 10 (+ one suspected)
ASD children also had attention deficit symptoms, and seven of them were identified as having hyperactivity as well.
Both ASD and typical children did not have any physical disorder.
One ASD child (male) and four typical children (1 male and 3 female) were excluded because their data were corrupted.
Therefore, this study only processed 21 ASD and 31 typical children’s data.
Table 5 Differences for age and Development Quotient (DQ) were insignificant ( \(p > 0.05\) ).
Full size table
During the experiment
, the subjects were seated in front of a notebook equipped with an eye tracker and web camera (Fig. 6).
They responded to the stimulus by pressing the spacebar on the keyboard.
The proportion of the Go and NoGo stimuli was uniform and the order of appearance was set in advance; their appearance time was 700 ms; the minimum and maximum of the waiting period were 700 and 1000 ms.
Figure 6 Experimental protocol of this study.
The distance between the child and the monitor was about 60 cm.
The notebook was equipped with a web camera and an eye tracker.
Full size image
Before starting the experiment, the eye tracker was calibrated and an instructor explained the game and its rules to the subject; the instructor asked the subjects to respond immediately when the stimulus appeared.
All subjects participated in a one-minute training session before taking a four-minute evaluation.
Ethics statement and consent
Before participating in the experiment, informed consent was obtained from teachers and parents on behalf of the children.
The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Prefectural University of Hiroshima (letter no: 15MH070) and was conducted in accordance with the amended Declaration of Helsinki.
Features
Figure 7 shows the pipeline for extracting spatial and gaze-adjustment features from response and gaze data.
Before extracting the features, preprocessing was performed to eliminate noise and redundant data.
Figure 7 Features extraction pipeline used in this study.
The inputs consists of gaze and object locations, response, and response time.
Full size image
The responses whose RT was less than a threshold were considered as outliers; 6.6% of typical and 7.3% of ASD data were removed.
The threshold was the RT’s median absolute deviation30 (104.75 ms) multiplied by a constant scale factor of the normal distribution (1.4826): 1.4826 \(\times\) 104.75 = 155.30 ms.
The data were down-sampled from 144 to 72 Hz to remove redundancy; a Savitzky-Golay filter31 (\(n = 5\) and \(poly = 2\)) was used to perform smoothing to prevent artifacts during numerical differentiation.
Spatial features
The spatial features comprised 24 attributes (Table 6) that can be grouped into three categories: game performance, absolute gaze position, and gaze-to-object movement.
Table 6
The list of spatial features extracted from response and gaze behavior.
Full size table
Game performance features consisted of subjects’ average response time (R t ) and variance (R t -var) and the percentages of their positive and negative responses towards the Go and NoGo stimuli.
R t (Eq. 1) measured the time difference between when the character appeared (\(t_{a}\)) and when the subject reacted to it (\(t_{r}\)); while RT-var was the standard deviation of R t .
The RT of the Go and NoGo stimuli were not separated.
$$\begin{aligned} R_t = t_{a} - t_{r} \end{aligned}$$ (1)
Gaze position features measured the absolute position of subjects’ gaze during the experiment.
The gaze trajectory area was calculated using the Convex Hull algorithm32, and its value was normalized into 0 to 1.
Gaze velocity and acceleration along the x and y axes were calculated respectively as the Savitzky-Golay smoothed first and second time-derivatives of the corresponding coordinate locations.
Gaze distance (Eq. 4) and angles (Eq. 5) were the Euclidean distance and angle between gaze positions (g(t) and \(g(t+1)\)).
The gaze spatial distribution was estimated using a 2D histogram algorithm, using 100 cells along each of the x and y axes.
$$v = \sqrt {\partial _{t} x^{2} + \partial _{t} y^{2} }$$ (2)
$$\partial v = \sqrt{{\partial _t
^ 2
x}^2 + {\partial _t
^ 2 y}^2}$$ (3)
$$d(t)
= |g(t+1) -
g(t)|$$ (4)
$$a(t) = \arccos \left( \frac{g(t+1) \cdot g(t)}{|g(t+1)|\cdot |g(t)|}\right)$$ (5)
Gaze-to-object movement comprised the features that computed the relative position between subjects’ gaze position and the stimulus position.
Fixation time was measured as the time difference between when the subject’s gaze entered and when it left the stimulus area; the area was a circle of radius 0.25 (measured by Euclidean distance) from the center of the stimulus.
Gaze-to-object difference was subjects’ gaze positions minus object positions when the latter appeared on the screen.
Kernel density estimation and Welch’s method33 (\(nperseg = 32\)) were employed to estimate the probability and spectral densities of the difference, respectively.
The probability distribution of the gaze-to-object difference was computed using 50 cells along each of the x and y axes.
Regularity of gaze distribution was computed using Shannon entropy34 and expressed as:
$$\begin{aligned} H_s = - \int p(x, y) \log _2(p(x, y))
dx dy \end{aligned}$$ (6)
where p(x, y) was the probability density of a state in a two-coordinate plane; while for power spectral density, p(x, y) was the sum of squared magnitudes of the Fourier transforms of the respective x and y components.
Greater entropy indicates less intentional viewing behavior28 and suggests greater gaze dispersion.
The final value of gaze entropy was normalized by diving by the maximum possible entropy \(\log _2(N)\), in which N was the total number of states; in this study, N equaled to the total number of cells along the x and y axes.
Temporal randomness of gaze movement was measured by sample entropy (sen).
Sen is equal to the negative natural logarithm of the probability that two subsequences of equal length m that are similar will remain similar at the next time step35; higher sample entropy means lower predictability within the original sequence.
This study set m to two and estimated the distance between two template vectors with Chebyshev distance.
Gaze-adjustment features
Gaze-adjustment measured the distance between participants’ gaze and stimulus positions during times when the stimulus was presented onscreen.
Euclidean distance was used as the distance metric, with values ranging from 0 to \(\sqrt{2}\).
Since the appearance time of each stimulus depended on the subjects’ RT, which varied, each gaze-adjustment was represented by auto-regressive parameters (Eq. 7).
The model’s lag L was set to two (average of AIC: \(-9.129\)); hence, each gaze-adjustment was represented by three variables: \(\alpha\), \(\theta _2\), and \(\theta _1\).
$$\begin{aligned} y_t
= \alpha + \sum _{i=1}^{L} \theta _i y_{t-i} \end{aligned}$$ (7)
This study computed the average value of each coefficient for typical and ASD groups using the arithmetic means over the respective groups.
Also, the average coefficients were calculated for each response type to investigate the difference between ASD and typical children’s gaze adjustment characteristics in more detail.
Data analyses
Statistical analysis
The comparison between groups was computed using unpaired Student t and Mann-Whitney U21 tests.
While multiple comparison was performed with ANOVA test.
The effect size was calculated with Cohen’s d 36; typical and ASD subjects were treated as the first and the second groups, respectively.
The Benjamini-Hochberg procedure37 was utilized to control the false discovery rate associated with multiple comparisons, at the level 0.05.
Classification
Classification was performed to verify how informative the spatial and gaze-adjustment features are for differentiating ASD children from the typical ones.
Instead of using raw gaze-adjustment features, this study computed the gaze-adjustment features’ skewness, kurtosis, average, and standard deviation.
Then, the features’ dimension was reduced with Neighborhood Component Analysis38 and five components were retained; Principal Component Analysis was employed to initialize the transformation.
Spatial and gaze-adjustment features were normalized using z-normalization.
The AdaBoost22 with decision tree base estimators was employed to distinguish the features of ASD children from those of typical children.
The model’s hyper-parameter values were optimized using a grid search algorithm.
In particular, this study validated the max-depth of the estimator in the set {1, 3, 5, 7}, the max-leaf of the estimator in {3, 5, 7}, the number of estimators in {15, 25, 50, 75}, and the AdaBoost’s learning-rate in {0.5, 0.75}.
The max-feature-proportion of the decision tree was set to 0.5 for higher and lower proportion decreased the overall accuracy performance.
Accuracy, the Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC)23, and Area Under the Curve (AUC)24 were used as classification performance metrics.
The decision threshold for classification was set to 0.5, thereby predicted probability greater or equal to 0.5 was converted to ASD class and typical class, otherwise.
Three-fold cross-validation was used to validate the model.
Furthermore, this study examined the use of those features to identify ADHD symptoms in ASD children.
The experiment utilized the same protocol as the classification of typical and ASD children.
Candida auris, a potentially lethal fungus, has triggered the largest outbreaks in the country at Southern Nevada hospitals and long-term care facilities.
New COVID strain detected in Nevada not a major threat, officials say
The Medicare enrollment basics that everyone needs to know
This photo shows a strain of Candida auris cultured in a petri dish at a CDC laboratory.
(Shawn Lockhart/CDC vía AP)
Candida auris, a potentially lethal fungus, has triggered the largest outbreaks in the country at Southern Nevada hospitals and long-term care facilities.
C. auris, as it’s often called, has spread at an “alarming rate” in the U.S., according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Southern Nevada last year reported the most invasive infections from the new pathogen, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
What is Candida auris?
Candida auris is a strain of yeast in the same family that causes thrush, a white rash in the mouth and throat, and vaginal yeast infections.
C. auris was first identified in Japan in 2009 and in the U.S. in 2016.
Cases were first detected in Southern Nevada in August of 2021.
How do people catch it?
C. auris can spread from person-to-person and also from contaminated surfaces or equipment.
Most cases in the U.S. are spread within, and among, health care settings.
What are the symptoms?
The most common symptoms of an invasive infection of C.auris — such as one of the bloodstream, brain or heart — are fever and chills that don’t improve after antibiotic treatment for a suspected bacterial infection.
This fungus is sneaky.
A person may have the fungus somewhere on the body without any signs or symptoms or making them sick, which is called colonization.
A person who is colonized, despite not having symptoms, can still spread the fungus to other people.
Where on the body does it colonize?
CDC epidemiologist Dr. Meghan Lyman said C. auris most often colonizes the skin.
“It can also live in other body sites without causing infection, like the nose, urinary tract, or respiratory tract,” Lyman said in an email.
What does Candida auris look like on the skin?
In a colonized individual, it’s invisible to the eye.
“There are lots of microbes, including bacteria and fungi, that live on the skin that cannot be seen visually,” Lyman said.
C. auris can also cause skin or wound infections.
“The signs and symptoms would be similar to infections caused by bacteria, such as redness, swelling, and draining.”
How is C. auris diagnosed?
Diagnosing C. auris requires specialized lab tests.
A colonization screening typically involves a swab test in the armpit and groin.
As part of diagnosis and treatment of infections, cultures may be taken from other parts of the body, Lyman said.
Who is most at risk for an infection?
Healthy people usually don’t get C. auris infections.
Patients who have been hospitalized for a long time, have a central venous catheter, or other lines or tubes entering their body, or have previously received antibiotics or antifungal medications, appear to be at highest risk.
“C. auris, like other germs on the skin, can cause invasive infections by entering breaks in the skin or mucosal barriers, such as stomach lining, the mouth/throat, and intestines, especially through indwelling medical devices, like central lines,” Lyman said.
More than one in three people who develop an invasive infection die, according to the CDC.
Many have other serious medical conditions.
What is the treatment for C. auris?
Three types of antifungal medicines are commonly used to treat C. auris.
A growing concern is that some C. auris infections are resistant to all three types of antifungals.
Does Candida auris go away in a colonized person?
“Patients with C. auris are often colonized for very long periods of time, even years, especially in those who remain in healthcare settings, but also in patients who have been discharged,” Lyman said.
“However, there is still a lot to learn about the patterns of colonization and the possibility of clearing C. auris from the body.”
What is being done about C. auris?
Federal and state public health agencies are investigating the spread of C. auris and have stepped up screening for it in medical settings.
They have recommended special cleaning protocols and other measures to prevent spread.
Nevada’s congressional delegation has called for more federal resources to fight the fungus.
Contact Mary Hynes at mhynes@reviewjournal.com or 702-383-0336.
Follow @MaryHynes1 on Twitter.
Most people who contract COVID recover within a few weeks.
But for some people, symptoms can develop later, or persist for a long time after the initial infection.
A recent review of the evidence on long COVID suggests the condition affects at least 65 million people around the world, occurring after at least 10% of COVID infections, and affecting all age groups.
Common long COVID symptoms include fatigue, shortness of breath, and difficulties with memory and concentration (“brain fog”).
Symptoms can worsen with physical or mental exertion.
We’re still learning about long COVID, and treatment options are very limited.
Recently, some people, for example on social media, have been talking about a variety of diets as ways to manage long COVID symptoms.
But what are these diets, and what does the evidence say?
This article is part of Quarter Life, a series about issues affecting those of us in our twenties and thirties.
From the challenges of beginning a career and taking care of our mental health, to the excitement of starting a family, adopting a pet or just making friends as an adult.
The articles in this series explore the questions and bring answers as we navigate this turbulent period of life.
You may be interested in:
What’s it like being a young person with long COVID?
You might feel like a failure (but you’re not)
Binge-eating disorder is more common than many realise, yet it’s rarely discussed – here’s what you need to know
Smartwatches could help detect and track COVID – here’s what the research shows
The anti-inflammatory diet
The process by which the immune system protects us from harmful pathogens is called inflammation.
But too much inflammation can be a bad thing.
Scientists believe that many of the symptoms associated with long COVID arise from chronic inflammation.
We know that some foods can promote inflammation, while studies have shown that components of certain foods may have anti-inflammatory effects.
So an anti-inflammatory diet involves avoiding foods that elicit inflammation, such as fried foods, refined carbohydrates, sugar, red and processed meats, and lard.
Instead it focuses on foods that reduce inflammation, such as tomatoes, olive oil, green leafy vegetables, nuts, fatty fish and fruits such as strawberries and blueberries.
These foods are high in antioxidants and compounds which help protect against inflammation.
If you’re looking for a diet that closely follows the tenets of anti-inflammatory eating, consider the Mediterranean diet.
Following a Mediterranean diet means eating lots of fruit, vegetables, nuts, whole grains, fish and healthy oils.
This diet is rich in vitamins, minerals and dietary fibre, and has an anti-inflammatory effect in the gut.
Researchers have suggested the Mediterranean diet may have benefits in reducing the severity of a COVID infection in the short term, as well as in addressing longer-term symptoms.
The low histamine diet
Histamine is a compound released by cells, often in response to an injury or an allergic reaction.
If we have hay fever or are stung by a bee, we might take an antihistamine.
Histamine can lead to inflammation and can be a problem when we can’t break it down properly, and levels get too high.
Symptoms when this happens can include headaches, diarrhoea, wheezing and fatigue.
Many of these symptoms are similar to those reported with long COVID.
Some scientists have proposed that the increased inflammatory responses seen with long COVID could be caused by increased histamine release by dysfunctional immune cells, which we’ve seen before with other conditions.
A low histamine diet involves restricting the intake of food and drinks considered high in histamine for several weeks, before gradually reintroducing them to test tolerance.
These include alcohol, fermented foods, dairy products, shellfish, processed meats and aged cheese, as well as wheat germ and a range of fruit and vegetables.
However, there appears to be lack of consensus on which foods are truly high in histamine.
And as the foods are wide ranging, this can be a tricky diet to implement without potentially causing nutritional deficiencies.
Although some people have reported an improvement in their symptoms by following a low histamine diet, there have been no studies published in this area.
Given the lack of evidence and the associated challenges, elimination of dietary histamine is not currently recommended for long COVID.
The plant-based diet
Plant-based eating refers to diets where the majority of energy is derived from plant foods, such as vegan and vegetarian diets.
Plant-based diets are beneficial to markers of inflammation and may favourably alter immune function.
More specifically, a well-balanced plant-based diet is high in fibre, antioxidants, good fatty acids and a range of vitamins and minerals, which positively affect several types of cells implicated in immune function and may exhibit direct antiviral properties.
For example, compounds called polyphenols found in fruits and vegetables may improve the functionality and activity of natural killer cells, an immune cell that patrols the body recognising abnormal cells.
Though some long COVID sufferers have touted the benefits of a plant-based diet, its usefulness to alleviate long COVID symptoms has not yet been examined in clinical trials.
Nevertheless, evidence from studies done before the pandemic suggests a plant-based diet may benefit some conditions that can also affect people with long COVID – including fatigue, headaches, anxiety, depression and muscle pain.
Read more: COVID and your gut: how a healthy microbiome can reduce the severity of infection – and vice versa
Take-home message
Some diets, such as a low histamine diet, are not currently backed up by enough data when it comes to the management of long COVID.
But a varied Mediterranean diet or well managed plant-based diet can provide certain nutrients which have positive effects on immune function and may protect against chronic inflammation.
That said, more research is still needed as to how these diets may affect long COVID.
If you’re considering changing your diet to manage long COVID symptoms, it’s best to consult your GP first to ensure you can do so safely.
My husband looked at me wide eyed as his phone screen lit up with a number from the fire department where he works.
After trading pleasantries with the fire captain on the other end of the phone, he nodded his head “yes” to me.
My husband had tested positive for COVID-19.
And based on the symptoms that started the day before, I had it too — which a PCR nasal swab test would confirm less than 24 hours later.
I immediately called my mom.
Not only because moms usually have a way of softening bad news, but because I had recently spent time with her and my dad.
I had a pit in my stomach realizing that I had unknowingly exposed them to COVID-19.
My family, like many others, had made the tough decision to cancel our traditional Thanksgiving Day plans.
I was disappointed, but it made sense.
My dad suffered a massive heart attack five years ago, and experts warn that heart disease makes people more susceptible to serious complications from the virus.
Having us all together wasn’t worth the risk.
But I hated the idea of my parents eating alone on Thanksgiving.
With me working remotely and my husband at home besides shifts at the fire station, it felt safe for us stop by for a quick meal — the four of us spread out in a kitchen that usually fits 20 people.
As I processed my positive test results, I thought back to the weekend after Thanksgiving when I had returned to my parents’ house to pick out and put up a Christmas tree.
I thought about my dad and me standing together as we strung the Christmas lights.
I thought about how I had sneezed while driving with my mom, and how I hadn’t worn a mask in their home.
I thought about how the congestion, headache and heaviness had hit me less than 48 hours later.
I was almost certainly contagious when I spent hours with them.
I wouldn’t wish on anyone the anxiety I felt knowing that I had exposed my parents, both in their 70s, to a virus that could put them in the hospital, or worse.
I’m not sharing this to be an alarmist.
My husband and I both had mild symptoms — no fever, no cough, no serious shortness of breath.
I’ve felt worse from a sinus infection.
The most unpleasant symptom I experienced was regret.
I naively thought there was little chance that I could have the virus because I wear a mask in public and mostly work from home.
I was wrong.
I felt regret and some shame because I knew better than to spend hours indoors unmasked with family, yet I did it anyway.
I even went so far as to hug them.
I'm sharing this because I don't want other people to feel the same way I felt about potentially infecting people I love.
My parents never developed any symptoms and both tested negative for the virus, but it was a long week of waiting.
Every time my mom called to check in, I braced for her to say she had woken up with tightness in her chest, or that my dad had a fever.
My husband and I have no idea where we caught COVID-19.
His job seemed like the most likely place, but no one he works with directly tested positive.
It's obviously a sneaky virus that experts are still working to better understand.
Dr. Todd Ellerin, director of infectious diseases at South Shore Health, recently told me about a study suggesting that up to 70 percent of people with COVID-19 don't transmit it to anyone.
But so-called superspreaders are very contagious and likely cause the vast majority of new infections.
Ellerin said there is no way to predict who, if infected, will become a superspreader of the virus.
"What we can predict is that there is a ton of COVID-19 in our communities, and if we don’t turn it around, we'll have big problems," Ellerin told me.
As the holidays approach, take a minute to really think about whether a few hours together is worth potentially making the people you care most about sick.
I found out firsthand that it isn't.
Please consider supporting local journalism by purchasing a digital subscription to The Patriot Ledger today.
Ellen DeGeneres took to her Instagram to share a health update with her fans after announcing she had tested positive for coronavirus last week.
She posted a video from her home, saying she feels “100%” despite the diagnosis.
“I feel really good,” the 62-year-old television host said.
“One thing that they don’t tell you is that you get, somehow, excruciating back pain,” she added.
“Didn’t know that was a symptom
but I talked to some other people…Who knew?
How come?"
Though the U.S. Centers for Disease Control does not list back pain specifically as a COVID-19 symptom, “muscle or body aches” is one of the disease’s symptoms.
Other telltale signs of coronavirus are fever or chills, cough, shortness of breath, fatigue, headache, new loss of taste or smell, sore throat, congestion or runny nose, nausea or vomiting and diarrhea.
The CDC has listed emergency warning signs that indicate patients should head to the emergency room as well, including trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake and bluish lips or face.
DeGeneres, 62, confirmed she’d contracted the disease on Dec. 10, writing, "Hi Everyone, I want to let you all know that I tested positive for Covid-19.
Fortunately, I'm feeling fine right now.
Anyone who has been in close contact with me has been notified, and I am following all proper CDC guidelines.
"
“I'll see you all again after the holidays.
Please stay healthy and safe," she added.
The longtime host returned for season 18 of her eponymous talk show in September amid months of controversy.
Earlier in the year, accusations about the show's set being a toxic workplace led to an internal investigation and the departure of three executive producers.
DeGeneres then used her season premiere monologue to apologize and later thanked her “amazing staff” during her acceptance speech at the E!
People's Choice Awards when she accepted the award for best daytime talk show of 2020.
Fans posted well-wishes on her Wednesday video.
“Love you and am thinking of you and I’m so happy that you’re feeling ok... this world needs you,” Joshua Radin wrote with a few hearts.
“Get well soon Sweet Ellen,” another fan wrote.
Doctors at Boston Children’s describe 75 croup cases and offer advice for parents.
(Photo: AdobeStock)
During the Omicron surge, pediatricians and emergency departments (EDs) began noticing something new: a surge in croup among infants and young children.
Marked by a distinctive “barking” cough and sometimes noisy, high-pitched intakes of breath, croup can happen when colds and other viral infections cause the voice box, windpipe, and bronchial tubes to become inflamed and swollen.
Doctors at Boston Children’s decided to take stock, looking back at their records of children with croup and COVID-19.
In a report in the journal Pediatrics, they provide the first rigorous description of COVID-19-related croup, reviewing the cases of 75 children who came to the ED.
The review extended back to the beginning of the pandemic, but 80 percent of the children arrived during the Omicron surge.
“There was a very clear spike when Omicron became the dominant variant,” says study leader Dr. Ryan Brewster, a resident in the Boston Combined Residency Program in Pediatrics.
A snapshot of COVID croup
Some of the croup cases at Boston Children’s were surprisingly severe, requiring more medication doses than usual and prompting more hospital admissions than expected.
In keeping with the usual pattern of croup, most of the children were under age 2, and about 70 percent were boys.
Except for one child with a common cold virus, none had a viral infection other than COVID-19.
Although no children died, nine of the children (12 percent) were struggling to breathe and needed to be hospitalized.
Four of the nine (44 percent) required intensive care.
By comparison, before COVID-19, fewer than 5 percent of children with croup were hospitalized, according to a medical review.
Of those, only 1 to 3 percent needed to be intubated.
“Most cases of croup can be treated in the ED or pediatrician’s office with the steroid dexamethasone and supportive care,” Dr. Brewster says.
“Our relatively high rate of hospitalization and the number of treatments hospitalized kids needed — an average of six doses of dexamethasone and eight treatments with nebulized epinephrine — suggests that COVID-19 might cause more severe croup than other viruses.
We need more research to determine the best treatment options for these children.”
Why are all these cases of COVID-19 croup cropping up?
Evidence from several laboratory studies suggests that the Omicron variant mainly attacks the upper airway — the throat and bronchial tubes — whereas earlier strains mainly targeted the lungs, says Dr. Brewster.
While these studies were in animals, it seems likely that the same is true for people.
What if my child has croup?
You can care for mild croup at home by sitting with your child while they breathe cool mist from a humidifier or steam from a hot shower for 15-20 minutes.
A favorite song or book can help ease your child’s anxiety, which can worsen croup symptoms.
But the following signs should prompt a call to your pediatrician, and possibly a visit to the emergency department:
frequent noisy inhalations and barking cough at rest (when your child is calm and not moving around)
clear struggles to breathe: sucking in the breastbone or ribs, using the belly muscles to help take breaths, flaring the nostrils
increased fatigue or sleepiness
blue lips or blue finger tips
a temperature higher than 100.4°F for more than three days
symptoms of mild croup lasting longer than seven days
If my child has croup, does that mean they also have COVID-19?
It’s possible.
“While many viruses can cause croup, you should also consider the possibility that your child has COVID-19,” says Dr. Jonathan Mansbach, who is chief of Hospital Medicine at Boston Children’s and oversaw the study.
“Consider getting testing them and other family members tested, especially if there’s reason to think they’ve been exposed.”
Learn more about COVID-19 research at Boston Children’s
Budding plants and blooming trees signal the return of spring, triggering congestion, coughing and sneezing for the millions of seasonal allergy sufferers.
Thanks to our sponsors: View all sponsors
With COVID-19 still circulating across the country and the state, how can you tell if your stuffy nose is just a case of hay fever and not something more?
Dr. Michael Lin, an infectious disease specialist at Rush University Medical Center, says cough, congestion and a runny nose are the most common symptoms shared by both seasonal allergies and COVID-19.
Fatigue, headaches and shortness of breath can also occur with either, but the latter occurs more often with COVID-19 than seasonal allergies, according to Lin.
Itchy or watery eyes and sneezing are common seasonal allergy symptoms and not typically associated with COVID-19.
“The top three symptoms that point toward COVID-19 are fevers and chills, muscle or body aches, and the new loss of taste or smell,” Lin said.
While sudden loss of taste or smell can occur with other respiratory viruses and the flu, those symptoms “raise a red flag it could be COVID-19, especially since the virus is circulating in the community.”
Newer COVID-19 variants like omicron and its subvariant BA.2 tend to cause milder symptoms than the original strain, which means people may not experience a sudden loss of taste or smell – hallmark symptoms associated with the virus.
“Not everyone will have a loss of taste or smell – that occurs in a fraction of people,” Lin said.
“I think people need to understand that there’s a whole range of symptoms with COVID-19 and seasonal allergies.
You have to use your judgment to some extent.”
To better gauge the likelihood someone has COVID-19 versus seasonal allergies, Lin says people should consider whether they’ve been recently exposed to the virus and how much of the virus is circulating in their community.
“If you were recently exposed to someone who had COVID, that should raise a higher suspicion for symptoms that are ambiguous,” he said.
“The higher prevalence of COVID-19 in a community, the more likely your symptoms could be COVID.”
When in doubt, take a COVID-19 test.
“I encourage people to do a test.
Having rapid at-home tests these days are convenient ways to test yourself and to get an answer quickly,” Lin said, adding people should take a PCR test if their symptoms persist or get worse.
“If there’s any doubt, especially if you’re working with people who are vulnerable, it makes sense to avoid going to work or school if you’re very unsure and symptomatic,” he said.
“We’re still at a time where there is COVID in the community, and there’s a slight uptick.
We want to prevent transmission, especially now as masking becomes less common.”
In addition to testing, Lin advises people who are experiencing symptoms to wear a face mask to prevent infecting others as public health officials also see a rise in other respiratory viruses.
“There’s been a small uptick in flu and other non-COVID respiratory viruses,” he said.
“Even if you test negative for COVID, if you have symptoms that look like COVID, it could be some other respiratory virus like the flu.
So err on the side of staying home.”
Contact Kristen Thometz: @kristenthometz | (773) 509-5452 | [email protected]
Thanks to our sponsors: View all sponsors
Adults with ADHD find it difficult to stay focused and battle with prioritisation, potentially leading to missed deadlines and forgotten meetings or social plans
October is ADHD Awareness Month, and with an estimated 2.6 million people in the UK living with the condition, more awareness is needed.
The condition - which stands for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder - affects a person’s everyday life, relationships and work.
Data reveals up to 40% of ADHD sufferers also experience problems with sleep.
The exact cause of ADHD is unknown; however, the condition has been shown to run in families.
Symptoms of ADHD start in early childhood and continue into adulthood.
What are the signs to spot and why are university students most at risk?
Why is ADHD diagnosed in adults?
Image: Getty Images/iStockphoto) Getty Images/iStockphoto)
In some cases, ADHD is not recognised or diagnosed until the person is an adult.
Most ADHD diagnoses happen when children are deemed disruptive or hyperactive, but many others fly under the radar as their behaviour may not be as impactful, and therefore they risk going undiagnosed right through to adulthood.
New research has revealed the high number of university students suffering with the condition, leading to a high drop-out-rate.
ADHD and university
Dr Leon Rozewicz, consultant psychiatrist at Priory Hospital North London, says: “ADHD can often ‘first manifest’ at university.
“A highly structured school and home can allow people with ADHD to do very well, achieving As and A*s at A-level, and 8s and 9s at GCSE.
“Young people with ADHD can compensate for their symptoms with a good structure at home and at school.”
Further discussing why university students experience a “perfect storm” for ADHD, Dr Rozewicz explained: “The increasing need to be focused and organised at university can prevent them from going on to fulfil their potential.
“So, when students arrive at university, there is much less structure; parents don’t supervise independent work and there may be very few hours of face-to-face lectures, with an expectation for self-directed study.
“In addition, there are many other distractions, partying, new relationships, alcohol - basically ‘burning the candle at both ends’.
“So, when a student finds themselves unable to cope – and the ‘scaffolding’ which was provided by the school and the parents is taken away - ADHD can come to the fore and appear for the first time.”
Signs of adult ADHD
Image: Getty Images/Tetra images RF) Getty Images/Tetra images RF)
Symptoms of adult ADHD include:
Impulsiveness
Disorganisation and problems prioritising
Poor time management skills
Problems focusing on a task
Trouble multitasking
Excessive activity or restlessness
Poor planning
Low frustration tolerance
Frequent mood swings
Problems following through and completing tasks
Hot temper
Trouble coping with stress.
Treatment for ADHD
“ADHD can be treated using medicine or therapy, but a combination of both is often best,” says the NHS.
“Treatment is usually arranged by a specialist, such as a paediatrician or psychiatrist, although the condition may be monitored by a GP.”
Dr Rozewicz added: “Experienced psychiatrists and therapists, including my colleagues at Priory, can devise bespoke ADHD treatment tailored to individual diagnosis, with the aim of reducing associated symptoms through a variety of evidence-based treatment methods."
The flowers are in bloom along the Ballona Creek bike path and all over Southern California.
Which prompts a question: Is that sneeze allergies or COVID?
It’s a confusing time for pollen-sensitive Southern Californians.
Spring has arrived, bringing with it the sneezing, coughing and wheezing triggered by seasonal allergies.
The Santa Ana winds expected to gust this week will cause their share of stuffy noses and scratchy eyes as well.
But at the same time, a coronavirus subvariant dubbed BA.2 is gaining steam, reversing the steady decline in COVID-19 cases we’d seen since the Omicron variant caused a huge winter surge.
So if you’re working your way through a box of tissues, you may be wondering — is this pollen or something worse?
(And by that I don’t mean dust mites.)
Advertisement
Experts say that it may be harder to distinguish an allergic response from a coronavirus infection if you’re fully vaccinated, given the protection you’ll have against a more severe case of COVID.
Nevertheless, they point to a few telltale signs to help you decide whether to get tested or see a doctor.
It’s helpful to start with a look at what allergies are and how the body responds to them.
An allergy is an overreaction by your immune system to an otherwise harmless substance, such as tree pollen or cat dander, that you inhale, swallow or touch.
The immune system interprets the substance as a threat, spawning an antibody specific to it (or mobilizing one, if the antibody already exists).
At a very high level, that’s also how the body reacts to the coronavirus that causes COVID-19.
In the case of an allergy, though, the antibodies stimulate the cells in the affected area to release an excessive amount of histamine, a chemical that (among other things) causes your nose to run and your eyes to itch as the body tries to expel the unwelcome substance.
Left untreated, a runny nose can also cause a trickle of mucus from the sinus into the throat (“post-nasal drip”) that can add a cough to your sneezes.
Coughing is a sign of a COVID-19 infection too, as is congestion, said Dr. Rita Kachru, section chief of clinical immunology and allergy at UCLA.
That’s not because of histamines, however; there’s a completely different mechanism at work when the coronavirus invades your airways.
All the same, it’s part of the symptoms overlap that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention illustrated with this chart on Twitter:
🌿🌼 Both seasonal allergies and #COVID19 can cause cough, fatigue, and headache, but fever and chills are more common with COVID-19.
Use this chart to learn more about similarities and differences between COVID-19 & allergies.
More: https://t.co/qRRPzV357g. pic.twitter.com/KtRICw1oTj — CDC (@CDCgov) February 5, 2022
As the CDC notes, there are at least four differences that could distinguish your allergies from COVID.
Fever, body aches and loss of a sense of taste or smell are common among COVID patients but not allergy sufferers.
Also, people with COVID may feel short of breath, but you wouldn’t ordinarily experience that with allergies unless you had asthma, the CDC says.
Just as fever is usually a telltale sign of an infection, an itchy nose is usually a giveaway for allergies.
“You’ll never get itchiness from a virus or bacteria,” Kachru said.
But not every coronavirus infection plays out the same way, so the absence of fever, body aches or disconnected taste buds isn’t a sure sign that you don’t have COVID.
Advertisement
That’s why the first thing you should do is consider your symptoms in context, said Dr. Dean Metcalfe, a principal allergic disease investigator at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
Do your allergies usually pick up around this time of year?
Are you having symptoms beyond the usual sniffling and sneezing?
Have you been around somebody suffering from the flu or COVID-19?
“By and large, when you get the flu or COVID-19, the predominant problems are not this intense itching you get with allergies,” Metcalfe said, adding, “Those things that suggest a wider inflammatory response outside the upper airways are what you have to look out for.”
Another test: If you have allergies that plague you all year, such as a sensitivity to dust or to your cat, you should have an idea of your usual level of misery.
What you’re looking for, said Kachru, is “an increase in the symptoms or a shift in the symptoms.”
Maybe there’s more coughing, a lot more drainage or discoloration in the draining, she said.
Also, if you have asthma and your symptoms worsen, “you really need to see your doctor” even if you’re not sure whether it’s COVID, Metcalfe said.
The differences blur, however, if you’ve been fully vaccinated.
On the positive side, Metcalfe said, “you are not at high risk for something severe.”
He added, “You don’t worry too much unless you get fever, chills [or] myalgia,” the muscle aches and pains that can accompany COVID.
Kachru pointed to one other potential source of non-COVID misery in Southern California this weekend: the powerful winds that are expected to blow through the area.
People who are sensitive to the onslaught of airborne particles, diesel fumes and air pressure changes will experience vasomotor rhinitis, which she described as a more nerve-related issue that results in an irritated, runny and congested nose.
Advertisement
Here’s one more reminder: “Always err on the side of testing,” Kachru said.
If you suspect your tormentor is COVID and not the flowers blooming in your yard or the Santa Ana winds, you can still get tested for free, order a free test kit from the federal government, or obtain an at-home test kit paid for by your insurer.
Former National Football League (NFL) players who experienced concussion symptoms during their playing careers performed worse on cognitive tests later in life, cross-sectional data showed.
Retrospectively reported concussion symptoms were associated with worse performance on a battery of tests that assessed episodic memory, sustained attention, processing speed, and vocabulary nearly 30 years later, reported Laura Germine, PhD, of McLean Hospital and Harvard Medical School in Boston, and co-authors.
After adjusting for age, cognitive performance was correlated with football concussion symptoms (r p -0.19, 95% CI -0.09 to -0.29, P<0.001) but not with diagnosed concussions, years of professional play, or age of first football exposure, the researchers wrote in Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology.
The results emphasize the importance of tracking concussion symptoms in research, not just diagnosed concussions, Germine and colleagues noted.
They also shed light on how professional football careers might affect cognitive aging.
"It is well established that in the hours and days after a concussion, people experience some cognitive impairment.
However, when you look decades out, the data on the long-term impact have been mixed," Germine said in a statement.
"These new findings from the largest study of its kind show that professional football players can still experience cognitive difficulties associated with head injuries decades after they have retired from the sport," she noted.
The study evaluated 353 former NFL players with a mean age of 54 who completed both an online cognitive test battery and a survey about demographic information, health conditions, and past football exposure including recollected concussion symptoms playing pro ball, diagnosed concussions, years of professional play, and age of first football exposure.
Recollected concussion symptoms were measured by asking the players how frequently they experienced headaches, nausea, dizziness, loss of consciousness, memory problems, disorientation, confusion, seizure, visual problems, or feeling unsteady on their feet after a head hit during play or practice.
Cognitive testing occurred an average of 29 years after the final season of professional play and included an hour-long assessment on TestMyBrain (a tool created by Germine in 2005) to measure processing speed, visual-spatial and working memory, and aspects of short- and long-term memory and vocabulary.
A comparison sample of 5,086 male nonplayers also completed one or more cognitive tests.
Relationships between recollected football concussion symptoms and cognitive performance remained after adjusting for race, education, and playing position, but were largely attenuated after adjusting for reported anxiety and depression symptoms.
"One possibility is that poorer cognitive performance, anxiety, and depression are all downstream effects of football injuries that produce concussion symptoms," Germine and co-authors suggested.
Age-adjusted cognitive performance was generally worse for former players than nonplayers.
While younger former players outperformed nonplayers on some tests, older retired players were more likely to have worse cognitive scores than their counterparts, notably on two tests of processing speed.
There are several possible explanations for this, the researchers suggested.
"One possibility is that football exposure accelerates age-related declines in processing speed, producing cognitive disadvantages for former players relative to nonplayers at older ages, despite former players' similar or better performance at younger ages," Germine and colleagues wrote.
"A second possibility is that improved head injury prevention and management over time (e.g., by incorporating head impact sensor technology) has lessened the impact of football exposure on cognitive performance, sparing younger former players from processing speed disadvantages displayed by older former players," they pointed out.
An important study limitation is the lack of cognitive performance data before concussion symptoms emerged, Germine and co-authors acknowledged.
More studies are needed to track cognitive changes in former pro sports players as they age, they noted.
"Future investigations of the long-term outcomes of contact sports exposure should include measures of sports-related concussion symptoms, which were more sensitive to objective cognitive performance than other football exposure measures, including self-reported diagnosed concussions," they wrote.
Judy George covers neurology and neuroscience news for MedPage Today, writing about brain aging, Alzheimer’s, dementia, MS, rare diseases, epilepsy, autism, headache, stroke, Parkinson’s, ALS, concussion, CTE, sleep, pain, and more.
Follow
Disclosures The research was supported by the Football Players Health Study at Harvard University, which is funded by the National Football League Players Association (NFLPA).
Germine reported relationships with Many Brains Project and Sage Bionetworks.
A study co-author disclosed relationships with HitIQ and REACT Neuro, Inc.
Primary Source Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology Source Reference:
Strong RW, et al "Association of retrospectively reported concussion symptoms with objective cognitive performance in former American-style football players" Arch Clin Neuropsychol 2023; DOI: 10.1093/arclin/acad008.
Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
Dancing With the Stars competitor and star Peloton trainer Cody Rigsby tested positive for COVID-19 on Thursday, September 30, 2021.
That’s just four days after his Dancing With the Stars partner Cheryl Burke announced she was also diagnosed with a breakthrough COVID-19 infection.
“Hi friends, I wanted to check in with you to share some news.
While I am fully vaccinated and took many precautions, following CDC guidelines, I recently tested positive for COVID-19,” Rigsby wrote on Instagram.
This breakthrough infection is actually the second time that Rigsby, a cycling instructor with Peloton, has gotten the virus, he explained in a video.
Rigsby described the symptoms he was experiencing as extremely mild compared to his more severe first bout of COVID-19, which occurred early in 2021 before he was vaccinated.
“I right now have really mild symptoms.
Congestion, little bit of a headache, cough,” Rigsby said.
“But in comparison to when I had COVID earlier this year, it is night and day.
So that must be the vaccine and the antibodies working, so we’re super grateful for that.”
Rigsby’s experience lines up with what researchers know about how vaccination affects the symptoms of a breakthrough infection.
In general, breakthrough infections do tend to be milder than COVID-19 infections in unvaccinated people because after the vaccine, the body is better prepared to mount an effective immune response against the virus.
In a person who is fully vaccinated, their immune system has already been triggered to practice fighting off the pathogen.
And while vaccination does not always prevent infection or illness altogether (especially if immunity has waned over time, the person has an impaired immune system, or the virus has evolved in certain ways), it is typically enough to protect against getting seriously sick.
Research shows that people who have been fully vaccinated have a significantly reduced risk of severe illness, hospitalization, and death.
(Some research indicates that COVID-19 reinfections may also be milder for the same reason, though there is less data here.)
Rigsby is currently self-isolating and taking it easy at home.
“To properly rest and recover as well as avoid exposing others, I will be taking a break in the coming days,” he wrote in the caption.
“I appreciate all your support and I’ll be back as soon as I am ready.”
Rigsby also joked that he was going to go enjoy as much delicious food as he could while he still has his sense of taste.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a genetic disorder characterized by progressive muscle degeneration and weakness due to the alterations of a protein called dystrophin that helps keep muscle cells intact.
Weakness related to DMD selectively affects the limb muscles close to the trunk before the ones far from it; the legs are affected before the arms.
Growth velocity with DMD is typically slower than normal in the first years of life, leading to short stature.
In a new study, researchers from McMaster University demonstrated the potential of a molecule that may help overcome some of the symptoms of DMD.
The molecule promotes the activity of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), an important fuel-sensing enzyme that is present in all mammalian cells.
The findings are published in The FASEB Journal in an article titled, “Acute, next-generation AMPK activation initiates a disease-resistant gene expression program in dystrophic skeletal muscle.”
The researchers utilized a next-generation oral AMPK agonist called MK-8722 and showed that when given as a single dose to mice with muscular dystrophy, it triggered signaling pathways associated with improved muscle health.
“DMD is a life-limiting neuromuscular disorder characterized by muscle weakness and wasting,” wrote the researchers.
“Previous proof-of-concept studies demonstrate that the dystrophic phenotype can be mitigated with the pharmacological stimulation of AMPK.
However, first-generation AMPK activators have failed to translate from bench to bedside due to either their lack of potency or toxic, off-target effects.
The identification of safe and efficacious molecules that stimulate AMPK in dystrophic muscle is of particular importance as it may broaden the therapeutic landscape for DMD patients regardless of their specific dystrophin mutation.
Here, we demonstrate that a single dose of the next generation, orally-bioactive AMPK agonist MK-8722 (MK) to mdx mice evoked skeletal muscle AMPK and extensive downstream stimulation within 12 h post-treatment.”
Previous research has shown that stimulating AMPK can mitigate the dystrophy—or wasting—of muscles, but AMPK activators have failed to reach the clinic due to either their lack of potency or toxic off-target effects.
“Our work highlights the therapeutic potential of this novel class of AMPK activators in DMD, as well as in other neuromuscular diseases,” said lead author Sean Ng, PhD candidate at McMaster University.
“We hope that these findings can be extended to other novel AMPK agonists that are currently being investigated in ongoing clinical trials.
If so, repositioning these therapies may pose as a cost-effective and efficacious method for the treatment of DMD regardless of the specific disease-causing mutation.”
Further studies are needed to test the chronic administration of such next-generation AMPK activators in dystrophic animals to further examine their safety and effectiveness.
Learning the signs and symptoms of breast cancer can help you make the best decisions on when to get a mammogram so that doctors can catch the disease as early as possible.
Here, you'll learn from an expert what the most common symptoms of breast cancer are, including those specific to early breast cancer, metastatic breast cancer and inflammatory breast cancer.
Breast cancer symptoms
“Most breast cancers are diagnosed without any symptoms,” said Dr. Thomas Buchholz, medical director of Scripps MD Anderson Cancer Center in California.
However, he noted that there are sometimes breast changes that can indicate something serious, and these should be checked out by your doctor.
So, what are the symptoms of breast cancer that people experience the most?
Here are four that Buchholz said signal trouble.
New breast lump
“The most common symptom of breast cancer, if you were to have symptoms, would be the feeling of a mass,” Buchholz explained.
According to Breastcancer.org, a lump in your breast may feel hard with uneven edges and be painless, or it may feel soft, round and tender.
Either could indicate cancer.
Buchholz emphasized that most lumps are benign, but you should still have them checked out by your doctor to rule out breast cancer.
Nipple discharge
“It's pretty unusual to have nipple discharge or bleeding from the nipple.
If that does occur … that would be certainly something that could be related to cancer,” Buchholz advised.
The Cleveland Clinic notes that if nipple discharge is clear or bloody, it could be an indication of the disease.
Underarm swelling
“Cancer in both men and women can spread to under the arms,” Buchholz said.
He explained that when breast cancer spreads, it can do so through lymph nodes, which filter cancer and other foreign substances.
“And so, you could have kind of enlarged lymph nodes under the arm for both male and female breast cancer,” he said.
Skin retraction (inversion)
A tugging sensation on the breast skin and nipple that leads to inversion is another symptom of breast cancer, according to Buchholz.
“You could get skin retraction because the cancer can grow in some of the structures that support the breast, and it can pull on it.
Like pulling on strings … inside a balloon,” he explained.
“It's a little bit more common to have a breast cancer with some sort of skin changes in the male compared to the female,” Buchholz added.
Specifically, the Mayo Clinic says male breast cancer symptoms can include:
A painless lump or thickening in your breast tissue
Changes to the skin covering your breast, such as dimpling, puckering, redness or scaling
Changes to your nipple, such as redness or scaling, or a nipple that begins to turn inward
Discharge from your nipple
In addition to the four general breast cancer symptoms, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention states that skin changes linked to breast cancer symptoms include breast skin irritation and red, flaky skin on the breast.
Early signs of breast cancer
The Moffitt Cancer Center says that, because breast cancer is a rapid overgrowth of cells, the most common sign of early breast cancer is a lump in your breast.
Other early symptoms of breast cancer could include:
Changes in the size of one or both breasts
Non-breast milk nipple discharge
Inverted nipple
Puckering of the breast skin
Flaking of the breast or nipple skin
Breast pain or nipple tenderness
Redness, thickening or puckering of breast skin
But Buchholz noted that most people won’t notice signs of breast cancer during its early stages, and it’s usually found using screening tests like mammograms or ultrasounds.
Metastatic breast cancer symptoms
“Metastatic cancer means the cancer has left the breast and has traveled to a different site in the body,” Buchholz said.
“And the most common sites are the lung, the liver, the bone and the brain … when it spreads to the bone, the most common symptom would be pain.”
Buchholz and Breastcancer.org stated that additional symptoms of metastatic breast cancer can include:
Joint, back, abdominal or chest pain
Nausea and vomiting
Loss of appetite
Weight loss
Jaundice
Confusion
Abdominal bloating
Shortness of breath
Consistent dry cough
Loss of balance
Seizures
Inflammatory breast cancer symptoms
Some unique symptoms can show up in cases of inflammatory breast cancer, which the American Cancer Society says is a fast-spreading disease that’s responsible for between 1% and 5% of breast cancers.
“It's actually cancer in the channels within the skin that's causing the problem.
There are some [of] what we call lymph channels in the skin that kind of drain some fluids off the breast, and those kind of get clogged up with tumor cells,” Buchholz explained.
Symptoms of inflammatory breast cancer can include:
Red and swollen breasts
Skin that thickens and pits, giving the appearance of an orange peel
Breast warmth, pain, itchiness or tenderness
One breast that’s larger than the other
Swelling of armpit lymph nodes
A retracted nipple
Buchholz advised that your doctor can check for signs of breast cancer when you come in for regular screenings.
He also emphasized that breast cancer is curable, especially when detected early.
Heart attack warning - a feeling in your throat could signal your risk
Researchers have linked infections such as pneumonia and urinary tract infections to blood clots and a subsequent risk of having a coronary event, such as a heart attack, or stroke within the next three months.
In the study published recently in the Journal of the American Heart Association, academic researchers examined a registry of patients tracked over multiple years in four US cities.
They looked at 1,312 patients who had a heart attack or other type of coronary event, and 727 other patients who had an ischemic stroke, the kind caused by a blood clot.
Of the heart disease patients, about 37 percent had some type of infection within the previous three months.
Among stroke patients, it was nearly 30 percent.
READ MORE: How to live longer - the ‘wonderfood’ cooking oil to protect against heart disease
In the large conference room of the Ricardo J. Bordallo Governor's Complex at Adelup, health officials, recovering addicts and representatives of nonprofit organizations filed in to proclaim September as Recovery Month.
But, for those who have battled the disease of addiction, each day sober is a win.
Recovery is nonstop and, for some in attendance of the proclamation signing on Friday, its been a long journey, one that individuals such as Jeremiah Santos, a peer recovery specialist with New Beginnings, now use to help bring others out of active addiction.
Santos was trapped in the world of drug addiction for 23 years, he said, his drug of choice: stimulants.
"Oh yes, addiction in general, the behaviors, the personality and whatnot, all the years, the substance use is just a symptom of my disease.
I think that I had this disease before I even started using as a child,” Santos said.
"I found a lot of comfort in using stimulants, different types, any types, also prescription medication, opioids.
I just waited till the brain chose the drug.”
Santos has been clean for six years, he said, noting that drug addiction, for many, is a hole that is tough to climb out of.
“Everyone’s bottom is different.
You hit bottom when you decide to put the shovel away,” he said.
“Everyone’s story of what their bottom is, is different.
I don’t think I lost everything, everything is still there, it's just that I lost control of what was outside of me.”
Like many addicts, Santos said, he had a false sense of control over his addiction.
“There was a point where I would think that I was able to use in moderation and it seemed that way in the beginning of my active addiction.
Then it got to the point where I was using and even if I wanted to stop, I couldn’t.
I just didn’t know how,” he said.
It wasn’t until he was arrested that he had his "aha" moment.
“I think when I finally got arrested it was like a blessing in disguise.
Through the court system I was able to be guided into the services.
New Beginnings, Adult Drug Court, they connected me with outside social supports and the 12-step programs,” Santos said.
Santos said there is no diet program to recovery, nor can you fake it till you make it.
“There’s no faking it, it's either you choose recovery or you don’t.
In the programs like the 12 steps, in the beginning we may try to find an easier way to do this where they try to practice using in moderation.
But, if the person is truly a person with disease and addiction, the moderation doesn’t exist,” he explained.
“All the programs work.
It's a matter of asking yourself if you are willing to make the programs work for you.
Everyone’s recovery is different, it's not a one-size-fits-all.
"
As a peer recovery specialist, psychiatric technician and substance abuse counselor, Santos said he uses his 23 years of active addiction experience to connect with those he now helps.
“I’ve been there before, I take a look at my life today and I never forget where I came from.
It's me putting myself right where that person is at and meeting them where they are at.
For a lot of people not recovering from an addiction it's hard for them to be where they are at.
It helps me to be empathetic,” he said.
Empathy is often lost for drug addicts, as the power of addiction can result in an end of relationships and familial support, he said.
“Addiction is a disease and a lot of time families may feel like they just want to give up on the person, but familial support is very important.
Just don’t give up on them,” he said.
"When a family member is dealing with a family member in active addiction, it's still your brother, sister, or daughter, or son.
What you are seeing is the disease, but they are still there.
"
Families are a big component to recovery, he said.
And while family support helps an addict, enabling does not.
“It's a huge difference, with the enabling part, nothing is going to get better, with support there’s changes being made,” he said.
"There’s always the hope.
Guam’s recovery community is really big, given our population and size of the island.
There’s hope and you can always get your life back, reinvent yourself and be better than they ever were.
A lot of people in recovery became people that are setting goals and meeting those goals that they never even dreamed of before in active addiction.
Now, everything is real."
Sign up to our free Living Well email for advice on living a happier, healthier and longer life Live your life healthier and happier with our free weekly Living Well newsletter Please enter a valid email address Please enter a valid email address SIGN UP
I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent.
Read our privacy policy Thanks for signing up to the
Living Well email {{ #verifyErrors }} {{ message }} {{ /verifyErrors }} {{ ^verifyErrors }} Something went wrong.
Please try again later {{ /verifyErrors }}
Adele Roberts has said receiving treatment for bowel cancer early helped “save my life”, as she supports a campaign to raise awareness about the symptoms of the condition.
The BBC Radio 1 DJ, 44, said in October 2021 that she was undergoing treatment following her stage two diagnosis, and later had surgery to remove a tumour, and began using a stoma bag.
After announcing she was cancer-free in June last year, she is now encouraging others to speak to a professional early on if they spot any of the signs.
Roberts said: “It took me a while to pluck up the courage to call my GP at first.
“My symptoms seemed like things I could explain away.
I didn’t want to be a burden to the NHS, and I was embarrassed.”
She continued: “I shouldn’t have worried.
My GP took my concerns seriously, put me at ease and also offered me a home-testing kit.
This meant I was able to do the test in the comfort of my own home.
“Soon after, I was diagnosed with stage 2 bowel cancer, which was very nearly developing into stage 3.
“Getting the help I needed in time helped save my life.
If you’re worried, please speak to someone, early detection saves lives and it helped save mine.”
A new survey by Bowel Cancer UK has found that 38 per cent of people cannot name any symptoms of bowel cancer.
As part of the charity’s new campaign for Bowel Cancer Awareness Month this April, they are flagging a number of the key signs, which include blood in your poo, change of bowel habits, pain or lump in your tummy, weight loss and fatigue.
Their research also showed that 59 per cent of people said that something would likely prevent them from contacting a doctor if they experienced a change in bowel habit, including difficulties getting an appointment, being too embarrassed or being too afraid that it could be something serious.
Professor Peter Johnson, national clinical director for cancer at NHS England, said: “As with all cancers, acting at the first sign of symptoms can make a big difference to how bowel cancer can be treated, and how successfully.
“You are much more likely to survive a cancer that is diagnosed early, which is why the NHS and charities like Bowel Cancer UK have run awareness campaigns about the signs to look for.
“Referrals for bowel cancer tests have been at record levels for the last 18 months, and we would encourage people to speak to a GP about any concerning symptoms: knowing what is normal for you and acting when something isn’t right can make all the difference.”
Genevieve Edwards, chief executive of Bowel Cancer UK, added: “It’s concerning that people aren’t aware of the symptoms of the UK’s second biggest cancer killer.
“Someone dies from the disease every 30 minutes in the UK, which means that in the time it takes to watch an episode of your favourite soap, one family will lose a loved one to bowel cancer.
“But it doesn’t have to be this way as it is treatable and curable, especially when diagnosed early.
“That’s why this Bowel Cancer Awareness Month we’re launching a new campaign to raise awareness of the five red flag symptoms of the disease, and asking people to take our KnowTheHigh5 quiz.”
What are the main symptoms of bowel cancer?
“It can be easy to dismiss the symptoms of bowel cancer, and people often put different bowel movements or bloating down to stuff they eat or changes in their body as they get older.
However, delaying getting help can really put people at risk – like many cancers, if caught early enough, bowel cancer is curable,” says Elizabeth Rogers, associate clinical director and GP at Bupa UK.
“If you notice any blood in your poo, changes to your bowel movement, bloating or abdominal pain after eating, see your GP as soon as possible.
Don’t put it off, early diagnosis really does save lives.
Other symptoms include unexplained weight loss and extreme tiredness for no reason.”
Even if there isn’t blood, get things checked
Spotting signs of blood is a red flag symptom that should never be ignored.
But that doesn’t mean it’s the only symptom – so even if there’s no blood, check in with your GP.
“Any changes to bowel movement, bloating and abdominal pain after eating should always be checked with the doctor as soon as possible,” says Rogers.
Keep an eye on changes
When it comes to our toilet habits, what’s normal for one person may be different for another.
For example, some people have more daily bowel movements while others go a lot less frequently.
A helpful rule of thumb is to always get things checked if you notice changes that are unusual for you.
“I always advise people to be aware of what’s normal for them,” says Rogers, “and to ‘check-CUP for cancer’ – to check for a ‘change that is unexplained or persistent’.”
What if you’ve already got a history of dodgy digestive symptoms?
Digestive issues are extremely common and these symptoms don’t always mean bowel cancer.
They can also occur due to conditions like IBS, food intolerances and inflammatory bowel disorders, for example.
This can make it tricky to know when to go back to your doctor, especially if you’ve been living with gut issues for a long time.
However, Rogers says it’s still important to “see your GP” if you notice any of the changes outlined above.
If anything seems unusual, different, or is causing concern, go get it checked.
Are some people at higher risk of bowel cancer?
Rogers says bowel cancer is “rare before age 40” but it is possible at any age.
Some people may be at higher risk, including “if you have a family history of bowel cancer, have an inherited bowel condition such as familial adenomatous polyposis, or hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer, also known as Lynch syndrome”.
People with long-term inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn’s or ulcerative colitis, or who have a history of non-cancerous growths (polyps or adenomas) may also be more at risk.
Rogers notes that other factors, such as obesity, smoking, a diet lacking in fibre and/or high in processed and red meats, and drinking too much alcohol can also be associated with higher rates of bowel cancer.
Any symptoms?
Get it checked
That said, the disease can impact people who are fit and healthy too – Roberts is known for her love of fitness and being a keen runner.
So everybody should get things checked out if they have any symptoms.
*
FIRST NAME
*
LAST NAME
*
EMAIL Your email address
*
PASSWORD Must be at least 6 characters, include an upper and lower case character and a number Show
* YEAR OF BIRTH
You must be at least 18 years old to create an account 2006 2005 2004 2003 2002 2001 2000 1999 1998 1997 1996 1995 1994 1993 1992 1991 1990 1989 1988 1987 1986 1985 1984 1983 1982 1981 1980 1979 1978 1977 1976 1975 1974 1973 1972 1971 1970 1969 1968 1967 1966 1965 1964 1963 1962 1961 1960 1959 1958 1957 1956 1955 1954 1953 1952 1951 1950 1949 1948 1947 1946 1945 1944 1943 1942 1941 1940 1939 1938 1937 1936 1935 1934 1933 1932 1931 1930 1929 1928 1927 1926 1925 1924 1923 1922 1921 1920 1919 1918 1917 1916 1915 1914 1913 1912 1911 1910 1909 1908 1907 1906
*
Required fields
I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from Evening Standard.
Read our privacy notice
CREATE ACCOUNT
I'LL TRY LATER
Already have an account?
SIGN IN
By clicking Sign up you confirm that your data has been entered correctly
and you have read and agree to our Terms of use , Cookie policy and Privacy notice .
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
Karen Dillon, a 62-year-old woman from Cheshire, England, had been searching for new ways to manage her menopausal symptoms.
The onslaught of frustrating hot flashes and fatigue was interfering with her work life, but she couldn’t find many options that helped.
While people might be more open to discussing reproductive health issues than they were in the past, she says that menopause is “still a little bit of a taboo subject for those women who are stuck in that environment.”
Menopause, which typically begins around the age of late forties, signals the end of a person’s reproductive years and menstruation, usually 12 months after their last period.
Although the process affects everyone differently, people who experience menopause often have symptoms like hot flashes, chills, sweating, fatigue, and insomnia.
Some don’t experience any of these discomforts during the transition, while others’ experience is much more severe.
Though modern medicine is still far from curing the process altogether, research shows that severe menopausal symptoms can be treated with hormone therapy.
Today there still remains a lack of remedies available for many individuals struggling with menopause, like Dillon.
But nearly five years ago, she finally found a solution to alleviate some of her symptoms: specially insulated clothing produced with technology once used in spacesuits.
Harnessing technology developed by NASA, the London-based company Fifty One Apparel creates clothes with fabric that was originally used to help keep astronauts comfortable inside their spacesuits.
Founded in 2017 by textile marketer Louise Nicholson, Fifty One Apparel is named after the average age people begin to experience menopause.
The company specifically draws upon a NASA-developed material that was used to improve insulation in the crew members’ gloves.
[Related: Future astronauts and space tourists could rock 3D printed ‘second skin’]
Spacesuits are constantly evolving.
Ever since NASA began sending humans into space, each design has built upon the last.
One of the major technologies the agency has unraveled is spacesuit temperature regulation to ensure astronauts can survive the harsh conditions of space while keeping their body temperature akin to what they would experience on Earth.
Temperature regulating technology originally came about in the 1980s, when officials at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston entered into a contract with Triangle Research and Development Corporation to explore how the material could be inserted into a working spacesuit glove, and if there were other uses for the technology beyond space flight.
While that iteration never did get to space, the research did help inform the development of future space gear.
The astronauts of the upcoming lunar Artemis missions, for instance, will instead rely on a portable life support system to keep them cool.
When NASA revealed the Artemis spacesuits in 2019, Amy Ross, one of the agency’s spacesuit engineers, said that their suits are made of materials able to endure both extremely hot and extremely cold temperatures (up to 250 degrees Fahrenheit above and below freezing).
As the mission gets closer to liftoff, even more improvements will be made.
“We are looking at the materials and the thermal protection of the suit to keep our astronauts comfortable while they perform their job,” Ross said during NASA’s live demonstration of the Artemis mission spacesuits.
“One of the things we’re looking at to go to the south pole [of the moon] is if we need to design some specific thermal systems for the boots, some cover layers, and maybe some active heating to keep the toes warm.”
But material designers have found that these thermo-regulated outfits that keep humans warm in space could also help people down here on Earth.
[Related: The medical community is finally realizing the uterus is more than a ‘baby house’]
Before Fifty One Apparel, Nicholson says there was a huge gap in the market for products that could provide some relief to people experiencing very acute menopausal symptoms.
“Menopause, it’s like an illness, it doesn’t discriminate,” says Nicholson.
“There’s nothing that dictates who really suffers with the menopause and who doesn’t.”
Fifty One Apparel’s product works to combat symptoms, like cold and hot flashes, by using a technology called Outlast, flexible phase-change materials that are able to maintain a steady temperature as they shift from solid to liquid or vice-versa.
Depending on what kind of environment they’re in, the materials are able to release and absorb heat.
By embedding the medium into tiny microcapsules called thermocules and then implanting them into fabric and other fibers, the garments are able to slowly warm and cool the body.
“This technology, it literally stores [heat], and then when the body starts cooling down, it sends it back,” says Nicholson.
Her company’s own apparel is created by bonding these thermocules to cellulosic yarn—fibers made with plant-based materials—which makes them lightweight and easy-to-clean while still providing a high-end, comfy feel.
Although there was another company that has experimented with the temperature-regulating tech for menopause relief in the past, Dillon, who is now a long-time user of Fifty One Apparel, says the products are more dependable, and of a higher quality.
As Fifty One Apparel continues to help people looking to allay some of their worst menopausal symptoms, Nicholson says she hopes to expand across the US, and be a resource to hundreds, if not thousands more individuals who are experiencing this change in their bodies.
Yet clothing isn’t the only product modern space exploration research has afforded us.
Outlast’s phase-changing technology has also been used in an array of everyday items, like desk chairs, underwear, and even bedding products.
Such a wide blanket of applications speaks to how rapidly emerging technology to help send humans to space can also be used to improve life on our own planet.
“You think about guys going up to the moon and sort of flying through space, then here am I sort of both feet firmly on the ground wearing the same kind of things they are,” Dillon says.
“It’s just amazing how that can be transferred from one situation to a completely different situation.”
It is thought to be caused by fluid collecting in the soft tissues at the ends of the fingers.
"This is caused by more blood flowing to the area than usual.
But we don’t fully understand why this happens," explains Cancer Research UK.
General symptoms of lung cancer include:
A cough that doesn’t go away or gets worse
Coughing up blood
Shortness of breath
Pain in your chest
Regular chest infections
Losing weight for no reason
Feeling very tired
Losing your appetite.
How to respond
According to Bupa, if you’re coughing up blood, have a persistent cough or are short of breath, see your GP as soon as possible, especially if you’re over 40.
READ MORE:
Bowel cancer: Feeling you need to empty your bowels with little or no stool is a sign
A new review reports that alterations in taste affected about a third of individuals with a coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) diagnosis, with females being affected more than males.
Study: Taste loss as a distinct symptom of COVID-19:
A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Image Credit: Nicole Rerk/ Shutterstock
This news article was a review of a preliminary scientific report that had not undergone peer-review at the time of publication.
Since its initial publication, the scientific report has now been peer reviewed and accepted for publication in a Scientific Journal.
Links to the preliminary and peer-reviewed reports are available in the Sources section at the bottom of this article.
View Sources
Background
A few months into the pandemic, specialists in otorhinolaryngology reported high rates of sensory loss in the form of an altered sense of smell and taste.
Some patients lose these sensations completely (anosmia or ageusia, respectively), while a partial loss is termed hyposmia or hypogeusia.
Others have distortions in their sensations, called parosmia and dysgeusia.
While not dangerous, the affected individuals may find it distressing.
The symptoms typically resolve within weeks to months.
By six months, the majority of patients report that they have regained normal sensation.
Earlier studies have examined one or a few aspects of this symptom set, or only as part of general neurological symptoms in COVID-19.
Many have covered only a limited period, thus excluding many relevant articles.
Some researchers claim that self-reported sensory loss is not reliable.
The current study, available as a preprint on medRxiv*, provides a fuller survey of literature in this area to help resolve the question of whether taste loss is as real as the loss of smell, rather than being falsely reported because of confusion with the latter.
In particular, the study focused on direct estimates based on individual taste tests vs. self-reported alterations in taste alone.
Due to restrictions imposed by pandemic conditions, the latter is the preferred methodology in many settings.
The researchers tested the postulate that direct tests would confirm the presence of taste loss in this condition but could even produce higher estimates than self-reported symptoms even though in the latter, the loss of smell is often conflated with that of taste.
What did the study show?
The researchers studied 241 papers with a pooled patient set of almost 139,000 patients with a positive COVID-19 diagnosis.
Of these, approximately 33,000 patients had taste loss in some form, with a pooled percentage of 37%.
The prevalence estimates were similar by either direct assessment or by self-report.
The age-group-based analysis showed that the prevalence estimate among those below 18 years was 11%, vs. the highest prevalence of 44% in those between 36-50 years.
Both the youngest and oldest groups had the lowest prevalence, while between 18 and 65 years, the prevalence ranged from 32% to 44%.
Thus, age may have affected the different estimates for the prevalence of taste loss in different studies.
With sex, again, males were found to contribute towards a lower prevalence of taste loss.
However, there was no significant difference in the estimates obtained by testing with taste strips, taste solutions, and other methods.
The highest mean prevalence was obtained using solutions.
Conclusion
Though taste loss occurs in many medical conditions, it can be confused with smell loss.
In COVID-19, however, taste loss is a unique feature of the illness, affecting millions of people and reducing their quality of life.
In this study, well over a third of individuals had taste loss, as expected from other studies.
The self-report-based prevalence estimates correspond to those obtained by direct testing, indicating the validity of these reports in this condition.
In the face of pandemic-related restrictions, innovative testing methods were used, including home testing.
However, the sheer variety of testing meant that it was non-standardized and thus led to difficulty in comparing results.
Nonetheless, there is a trend towards increasing sensitivity with the use of taste solutions compared to taste strips, which side-to-side comparisons must verify.
The higher prevalence in females may be due to their increased sensory capacity, while the reason for the highest prevalence in middle age is currently unclear.
The biological mechanism underlying these chemosensory symptoms remains an open research question, though some studies suggest that increased viral shedding in the saliva is linked to more taste loss.
This may indicate direct viral damage to the taste cells.
This is supported by the presence of the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), which is the viral receptor on the host cell, and of TMPRSS2, the protein required to produce the processed form of the viral spike, on the taste receptors as well as the supporting cells of the taste buds on the tongue.
Another putative mechanism is direct viral effects on the brain that lead to taste alterations.
Future work may focus on the standardization of methods used to examine this sense.
Loss of taste, which occurs due to disease, advancing age, or loss of chemosensory receptors, can significantly reduce the quality of life.
Secondly, there are no available preventive or screening measures for these chemosensory disorders.
The lack of standardized screening and testing guidelines has made it difficult to track these symptoms during the current pandemic.
Clinicians often neglect to assess taste in patients suspected to have or confirmed to have COVID-19.
These tests are important because they would provide a picture of how these symptoms evolve over the course of the pandemic and allow researchers to differentiate between smell and taste loss by using objective measures.
This news article was a review of a preliminary scientific report that had not undergone peer-review at the time of publication.
Since its initial publication, the scientific report has now been peer reviewed and accepted for publication in a Scientific Journal.
Links to the preliminary and peer-reviewed reports are available in the Sources section at the bottom of this article.
View Sources
Journal references: Preliminary scientific report.
Hannum, M. E. et al. (2021).
Taste Loss as A Distinct Symptom Of COVID-19:
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
medRxiv preprint.
doi : https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.09.21264771, https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.10.09.21264771v1
Hannum, M. E. et al. (2021).
Taste Loss as A Distinct Symptom Of COVID-19:
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
medRxiv preprint.
: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.09.21264771, https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.10.09.21264771v1 Peer reviewed and published scientific report.
Hannum, Mackenzie E., Riley R Koch, Vicente A Ramirez, Sarah Marks, Aurora K Toskala, Riley D Herriman, Cailu Lin, Paule V. Joseph, and Danielle R. Reed.
“Taste Loss as a Distinct Symptom of COVID-19: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.”
Chemical Senses 47 (January 1, 2022).
https://doi.org/10.1093/chemse/bjac001. https://academic.oup.com/chemse/article/doi/10.1093/chemse/bjac001/6529519.
In recent months, while making the press rounds for his new book Cinema Speculation, Quentin Tarantino has, like most acclaimed film directors, addressed the state of modern filmmaking.
Some of his complaints have been noted before by his elders, including Martin Scorsese and Steven Spielberg, but Tarantino sparked a whole new dialogue when he went on Tom Segura‘s 2 Bears, 1 Cave podcast and argued that Marvel stars aren’t movie stars and that there’s a noticeable difference between the two.
“Captain America is the star.
Or Thor is the star,” explained Tarantino, who is, of course, mostly right… though he’s also wrong in some regards.
After all, there are exceptions to every rule, and Chris Pratt embodies that more than anyone else.
Whether you love him or not, Pratt has become one of Hollywood’s hottest actors thanks to his back-to-back roles in the Guardians of the Galaxy and Jurassic World franchises, though one could argue that the latter trilogy, in particular, would’ve made just as much money no matter who played the lead.
After all, in the case of Jurassic World, audiences were generally there to see the dinosaurs, not Pratt’s Owen Grady.
The same argument could also be applied to Pratt’s other choices, which appear to be bulletproof seeing as most are part of well-established properties with built-in audiences.
After voicing the protagonist in The Lego Movie, this week sees him voicing the title character in The Super Mario Bros. Movie, and he has already recorded his lines as the lasagna-loving cat in a new Garfield movie.
These are all very deliberate, safe choices.
It’s hard to fail as a movie star when you’re taking so few risks, but nor can you truly soar, either.
If the audiences are built-in, as noted above, you can’t really call them your own, can you?
To be clear, there’s no denying that Pratt has come a long way from playing the schlubby, lovable dork Andy Dwyer on NBC’s Parks and Recreation.
In addition to his hit movie franchises, his work on Prime Video has served the streamer well, such as big-budget feature The Tomorrow War and the action series The Terminal List.
It’s fair to say that Pratt is at the peak of his career right now with The Super Mario Bros. Movie heading toward a huge opening and Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3 just around the corner… but does his astounding success make him a true Movie Star?
Has he ascended to the level of a Sandra Bullock or a Brad Pitt, or is his stardom merely a symptom of leading IP-driven blockbusters that people recognize?
Is he simply a beneficiary of two huge movie studios’ global marketing machines?
To honestly answer this question, we must generally understand both what a movie star is and what it is not these days.
In order to be a successful movie star, you need a charismatic personality, which Pitt, Bullock, and Tom Cruise have in spades.
It’s a magical, magnetic quality that’s impossible to define, but like pornography, you know it when you see it.
Throughout his own career, Pratt has been able to craft a down-to-earth comedic presence onscreen by working with directors such as Phil Lord and Chris Miller, as well as James Gunn, all of whom helped him hone those movie star qualities that draw audiences to theaters decade after decade.
However, as successful as Pratt has been anchoring IP, he’s at risk of falling into the same trap as Orlando Bloom and his own Guardians co-star Zoe Saldaña, who haven’t really seen their careers blossom outside of the well-known franchises that made them stars.
Saldana has even publicly acknowledged this as a problem with her career of late, as apparently those in the industry worry whether audiences too closely associate her with the billion-dollar hits on her resume.
Pratt, however, has thus far been able to avoid this issue by delivering two streaming hits for Amazon with The Terminal List and The Tomorrow War, and though both projects felt a little hollow and left room for improvement, they each pulled in solid viewing numbers — enough to merit second installments.
Although Pratt is riding high, having enjoyed recent success in streaming, he’s also in danger of becoming overexposed.
This is an issue that movie stars have faced before, from his Passengers co-star Jennifer Lawrence, who just returned from her own much-needed big-screen break, to Dwayne Johnson, who doesn’t know what a break is.
Pratt should err on the side of caution and subscribe to the philosophy that less is more when it comes to exposure, making it that much more special when he does grace us with his presence on the big screen, just as it feels special when we watch timeless stars such as Leonardo DiCaprio or George Clooney.
Though Pratt isn’t quite on their level yet, he has something those guys — and Will Smith, Ryan Reynolds, and Pitt — don’t really have, which is an everyman quality that matters to audiences who crave authenticity more than ever today.
But Pratt should look to those guys as shining examples of how to build a career, as they knew when to take chances and explore material outside of their comfort zone, and when to take paycheck gigs.
Even his Guardians co-star Dave Bautista has challenged himself beyond what the industry initially thought him capable of.
Harrison Ford should really be the model, and using that comp, I’d say that Pratt just needs to find his Witness.
While Pratt certainly has his own unique career obstacles to navigate, he definitely has a future as a movie star in this business, and may already be one in some respects.
Undoubtedly talented and surprisingly versatile, he has worked hard to get where he is and deserves every ounce of his success, even if he owes much of that success to the great movies that came before him.
It’s a career conundrum that affects many actors of his generation who have led reboots and remakes to the top of the box office but struggled outside of studio-backed blockbusters with hefty marketing spends.
With increasing avenues of content creation, passive consumption continues to dominate, making franchise stars more disposable.
You only have to look at Henry Cavill and Gal Gadot to see what I mean.
To quote the new Captain America himself, Anthony Mackie, “There are no movie stars anymore.
Like, Anthony Mackie isn’t a movie star.
The Falcon is a movie star, and that’s the fear.”
Pratt just needs to play his cards right if he wants to stick around for the long run and find original content that he can claim ownership of when it succeeds.
This year bodes well thanks to a one-two punch that could be the combination that unlocks the next phase of his career, and possibly his full potential, but he’ll have to branch out from Star-Lord and Raptor Daddy if he wants to stick around long enough to become a dinosaur in this business.
It’s still too early to render a final verdict on Pratt, who will surely be judged on what’s next once the Guardians trilogy concludes — and we’re not sure the Russo brothers’ $200 million action movie The Electric State co-starring Millie Bobby Brown really counts — but with that in mind, here’s hoping the actor takes some bigger risks going forward and pursues top-shelf filmmakers like Kathryn Bigelow and Bennett Miller, who brought out the best in him in Zero Dark Thirty and Moneyball, respectively.
Until then, we’ll just have to keep wondering if we’ve seen the best from Pratt, and what he’s-a really capable of.
Contemporary OB/GYN:
Hi, I'm Celeste Krewson with contemporary OB/GYN and I'm here with Dr. Christmas to discuss a study titled, “Menopause hormone therapy and urinary symptoms: a systematic review.”
Would you like to introduce yourself?
Monica Christmas, MD:
Hi, I'm Dr. Monica Christmas.
I'm an associate professor at the University of Chicago in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology.
And I'm the director of the menopause program there and the Center for Women's Integrated Health.
Contemporary OB/GYN:
So, can you tell me a bit about the study and your findings?
Christmas:
Yeah, so you know, the funny thing is that the idea to do this study came out of another project that I was working on, it was an international project where we were developing a core outcome set for menopause studies.
Prior to the development of this core outcome set, researchers that were developing a new drug or treatment for basal motor symptoms, hot flashes, night sweats, or genital urinary symptoms like urinary urgency, frequency, incontinence, recurrent urinary tract infections um the things that we'll talk about in my study.
So, previously, when you were doing it, you could pick whatever outcome measures you wanted.
And what would happen is when you had got down to comparing treatments, you really couldn't compare them because each study used a different outcome measure to assess their treatment.
Many times, they even used different words to define what they were studying.
So, this global project, comma, the core outcomes in menopause, developed a core outcome set, it's a minimum measurement that says that if you are developing a study to look at the treatment efficacy of whatever thing you're looking at, for either vasomotor symptoms or one of these genital urinary symptoms, you need to at least use this minimum outcome set to assess your treatment.
So, at any rate now, forwarding to the question, you asked me about my study, we're sitting in this global meeting with a lot of top heads in the menopause world, and there is this really spirited discussion about whether or not these urinary symptoms actually should be part of the genital urinary syndrome of menopause.
Historically, it was just vaginal atrophy, vaginal dryness that was related to estrogen deficiency, that dryness could lead to pain with intercourse or bleeding with intercourse.
And so, everybody kind of agreed on that.
But what was the controversy was whether the urinary symptoms, the urgency, the frequency, and recurrent urinary tract infections; were they really due to estrogen deficiency from menopause?
Or could they have just been related to aging?
And so, this conversation went on, we couldn't even really get to the topic at hand, which had to do with the core outcome set because the experts in the room didn't all agree that urinary symptoms should be included.
And so that's what really prompted me to do this systematic review, I wanted to see whether or not we had proven in the literature, that urinary symptoms did actually have some correlation with menopause.
And because many of us are using estrogen, hormone replacement therapy, well, for vaginal atrophy, local vaginal estrogen is the first line treatment.
And so, if you're saying that urinary symptoms are part of this genital urinary syndrome of menopause umbrella, then you're also thereby saying that vaginal estrogen or estrogen in general replacement should treat those symptoms.
And so that's really what we looked at.
We looked at all the randomized control trials that were done up until 2021, when we stopped our literature review.
And 1 looked at does hormone therapy actually improve urinary symptoms?
And then we also were trying to ascertain, was there some evidence that urinary symptoms were truly related to estrogen deficiency?
And what we found was that one, we really couldn't in the literature, even looking at epidemiological studies, really couldn't find anything that truly proved that these urinary symptoms were related to menopause.
And one of the big things that we saw is that systemic doses like higher doses of hormone therapy, actually, and many studies like the WHI where there were over 17,000 women enrolled in the study, that actually, systemic dose hormone therapy could cause new onset urinary symptoms, or in people that already had them at baseline could worsen their symptoms.
Smaller studies showed the same thing.
And then when we looked at all of the studies that assess local low-dose vaginal estrogen, so estrogen cream, estrogen, low dose estrogen ring, a low dose estrogen tablet or suppository, those all showed, actually, that local vaginal estrogen actually helped to improve those symptoms.
And you would think, well, well, why is that?
I don't have the answer to that.
So don't ask me that question next.
Contemporary OB/GYN:
Alright, well, that was gonna be my next question.
So instead, what steps can providers take to help women with urinary symptoms receive the treatment they need?
Christmas:
Well, I think one thing is understanding that systemic dose hormone therapy is different than local low-dose estrogen therapy.
And so, when we're counseling our patients about why we're going to choose one or the other, I think that's an important nuance.
So systemic or higher dose therapy is indicated when you are managing hot flashes and night sweats.
It's also indicated for the prevention of osteoporosis.
And you should also, unless there's a contraindication, use systemic higher dose hormone therapy, in somebody that goes through premature menopause, someone that goes through menopause earlier than the age of 40.
Vaginal estrogen, the local low-dose estrogen, does have a because it's not systemically absorbed and has a different safety profile.
And so, if somebody only has is presenting with your genital urinary symptoms, either vaginal dryness that leads to pain with intercourse, or bleeding with intercourse, or those urinary symptoms that I discussed, then you really don't need to use systemic dose hormone therapy with them, you only need to use local low dose estrogen.
And that's an important nuance because if there's a potential that it could cause or worsen their symptoms, you really don't want to put them on it.
If somebody though, has both, let's say you got hot flashes and night sweats, and you've got urinary symptoms, or sorry, vaginal-related symptoms to menopause, then they're probably they're just putting them on a low dose, local vaginal estrogen therapy is not going to help their hot flashes and night sweats.
So, for those patients, you do need to probably have them on a systemic dose of hormone therapy, and there are some higher-dose estrogen rings.
And so there's some thought that if you use one of the higher dose estrogen rings, it gets placed in the vagina, it stays in the vagina for 90 days, the person takes it out, and then throws it away and puts another one in that because it's actually being absorbed at the level of the vagina, that that actually may help not only alleviate their hot flashes and night sweats but also may help with those genital urinary symptoms as well.
If somebody has any type of apprehension, or just doesn't want to use a vaginal estrogen ring, those people actually may need both.
And I do think that's good for providers to know that just because you put them on systemic dose hormone therapy, most of them, the majority will come back and say,
oh my gosh, I feel like myself again, these hot flashes and night sweats are so much better, or they're gone completely.
But you know, I'm still having pain with intercourse, I still feel dry.
And some people will think, oh, well, you're already on this, this higher dose estrogen, like, we can't do anything else, or there must be something else wrong.
And indeed, actually, what's probably happening is that systemic dose isn't really treating the vaginal symptoms, and you have to give them both.
So those people may need a systemic dose hormone therapy as well as a local low dose option to help with those vaginal symptoms.
Contemporary OB/GYN:
That's really interesting.
So, what impact do you think this study will have in the future?
Christmas:
Well, I hope that the impact is that it leads to more research and understanding around not just general urinary symptoms related to menopause, but menopause in general.
There really has been a paucity of research for menopause, and most of that goes around hormone therapy.
And then I think this calls out that we really don't have a great understanding of what symptoms truly are related to estrogen deficiency after menopause, versus those that are related to maybe aging because menopause is inextricably tied to the aging process.
And sometimes it's really hard to differentiate that and many times we are attributing a whole host of add things to menopause.
And when we do that, it's kind of buying, you know, also saying that hormone therapy may help those things.
And as I discussed, there's really only 4 indications for use of hormone therapy.
So having a better understanding of truly what symptoms are related to menopause.
Are there any preventive things that people can do before they get to the menopause transition to hasten the effect right?
And are there other things if it truly is related to menopause?
Are there other things we need to be looking at in terms of treatment options?
Women’s PCOS symptoms vary from state to state in America and are influenced by race and general health, here’s why
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) affects 7–10% of women of childbearing age and is the most common cause of infertility.
In the U.S. alone, an estimated 5 to 6 million women have PCOS, but the disorder is still underdiagnosed.
PCOS is when women have two of the following criteria:
Androgen excess (excess male sex hormones such as testosterone)
Ovulatory dysfunction
Polycystic ovaries
Excessive hair growth and insulin resistance
In Alabama
, women with PCOS may be more likely to have excessive hair growth and insulin resistance, whereas women with PCOS in California may be more likely to have higher testosterone levels.
This is according to new research published in the Endocrine Society’s Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism.
How does race impact PCOS symptoms?
“Our study found geographical differences in PCOS in Black and white women, suggesting there are both genetic and environmental influences on how this disease manifests,” said Margareta D. Pisarska, M.D., of Cedars-Sinai in Los Angeles, Calif.
“Ongoing research is needed to identify modifiable risk factors for PCOS that may be race and ethnicity-specific to bring precision medicine to the management of this disease.”
Researchers compared data from 1,610 Black and white women with PCOS in Alabama and California and found some interesting regional differences.
Overall, there were many similarities between the races.
However, women with PCOS in Alabama were more likely to have excessive hair growth and insulin resistance, whereas women with PCOS in California were more likely to have higher levels of testosterone.
The average body mass index (BMI) of Black women with PCOS in Alabama and California did not vary much between the locations, whereas in white women with PCOS, the average BMI was higher in Alabama than California.
“Since we have now identified that there are geo-epidemiologic differences, we intend to do follow-up studies comparing black and white women with PCOS, controlling for geo-epidemiologic differences,” Pisarska added.
“Furthermore, we are trying to look at factors that are contributing to these differences in order to tailor treatments based on specific needs for improvements in care for all women with PCOS.”
The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is the main stabilizing ligament on the inside of the knee.
Its main function is to prevent the tibia (shin bone) from sliding forward and rotating on the femur (thigh bone).
Tears/ruptures of the ligament result in knee instability.
Anterior cruciate ligament tears: Causes, symptoms, diagnosis, treatments (Twitter/DrJeffBerg)
Causes:
Unlock exclusive access to the latest news on India's general elections, only on the HT App.
Download Now!
Download Now!
In an interview with HT Lifestyle, Dr Manu Bora, Knee Injury and ACL Surgery expert and Orthopedic Surgeon at Nexus Day Surgery Centre, shared, “ACL tears are typically caused by twisting or hyperextension injuries.
Sports activities like pivoting or sudden deceleration when running and falls during skiing are considered non-contact causes of ACL tears.
Direct trauma to the back or side of the knee during collision sports is considered a contact injury to the ACL.”
Symptoms:
Dr Manu Bora informed, “ACL tears cause immediate pain and often swelling.
You may feel something “pop” inside the knee.
An initial inability to bear weight on the leg may subside and walking may be possible after several minutes.
The knee may feel loose or that it is going to “give out” and returning to sport is impossible.
Over time, swelling will increase and motion may be lost.”
How is it diagnosed?
Revealing that your surgeon will perform a thorough history and physical exam with X-rays, Dr Manu Bora said, “On exam, swelling and loss of motion and strength are present.
Your surgeon will perform maneuvers to check the stability of all the knee ligaments and the meniscus.
An MRI is helpful to confirm the diagnosis, showing the ACL tear.
The type of tear (partial, complete, avulsion from either the tibia or femur) can be defined, which may assist in surgical planning.
The MRI may also show bone bruising secondary to the injury.”
Treatments:
1.
Non-operative - Dr Manu Bora explained, “ACL tears do not heal.
Some patients elect not to have reconstruction surgery.
Non-operative treatment increases the risk of “wear and tear” arthritis and meniscus tears because of the instability in the joint.
Non-operative treatment consisting of anti-inflammatory medication, physical therapy, cryotherapy and activity modification may be prescribed prior to surgery to decrease the swelling, regain motion and strength, as research has demonstrated that surgery is less complicated and patients have better outcomes.
Non-operative treatment in surgical patient may be skipped if other injuries to the meniscus and cartilage are present and need to be repaired immediately.”
2. Operative - According to the health expert, “Operative management of ACL tears depends on the type of tear.
ACL repair may be indicated in patients where the ACL is clearly torn off the wall of the femur (thigh bone) or tibia (shin bone.
ACL repair is accomplished through a minimally-invasive arthroscopic procedure and sewed back into place and fixed with screws or buttons.
The repair may also be supplemented with high-strength suture.”
Dr Manu Bora added, “If formal reconstruction is required, a new ACL graft will be fixed in place of the original ligament.
A technique for graft placement and graft choice is a shared decision between you and your surgeon.
Most techniques are performed through a minimally-invasive arthroscopic procedure.
The graft can be taken from around your knee or from a donor.
Postoperative rehabilitation, return to daily activities and return to sport depends on the technique and graft chosen and is at your surgeon’s discretion.”
3.
Internal Brace Option - Highlighting that the Internal Brace procedure, which has been proven to be efficacious, can be applied in various ways throughout the knee
, Dr Manu Bora said, “This augmentation helps prevent excess range of motion during the healing phase and may reduce the chances of secondary injury.
In the setting of ACL reconstruction, the Internal Brace procedure helps protect against various modes of failure including creep and irreversible stretch, traumatic tearing, and slippage of the tendon-bone interface.
The Internal Brace technique may also help protect small and vulnerable ACL reconstruction grafts from these modes of failure.”
Bowel cancer: Dr Hilary outlines the main symptoms
Bowel cancer claims around 42,900 new victims each year in the UK alone.
Kyron Hutchinson, from Leeds, was one of these thousands diagnosed with cancer in March 2020 aged just 31.
His story highlights the importance of listening to any unusual changes in your body and seeking medical help.
While bowel cancer doesn’t always trigger all the possible symptoms from the warning sign list, Kyron experienced a whole host of red flags before getting his diagnosis.
The first sign that rang alarm bells for the man was blood in his stool.
The symptom, medically known as haematochezia, is considered one of the most frequent signs of bowel cancer, according to research, published in the journal Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons of England.
The next symptom that was trying to alert Kyron to something being wrong also struck on the loo.
READ MORE: Heart attack breakthrough as scans could identify patients at risk 'years' in advance
Bowel cancer: Symptoms may include going to the toilet more often.
Trending
READ MORE Baby is saved by the world’s most expensive drug Feeling like you need to empty your bowels even when you don’t describes another key symptom - tenesmus.
This distressing symptom makes you feel like you need to poo even when your bowels are empty.
Because Kyron was in a “bad place”, he waited until November to seek medical help.
“It wasn’t until that November that I felt a lump just under my stomach that was painful to touch.
READ MORE: £3m miracle gene cure saves baby
but it's too late to save sister with same condition
SUBSCRIBE Invalid email We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you.
This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding.
You can unsubscribe at any time.
Read our Privacy Policy
The first sign that rang alarm bells for the man was blood in his stool.
READ MORE Woman shares the 'smelly' signs that led to cancer diagnosis “I went to the hospital but they wanted me to have a colonoscopy.
I had a colonoscopy in 2016 and it was the worst pain of my life, so I didn’t want to have another one and left the hospital.”
In March 2020, Kyron’s symptoms became so bad that he was rushed into an emergency colonoscopy.
He was diagnosed with stage three bowel cancer which left him in “shock”.
He said: “I dropped to the floor; I couldn’t feel my body.
I cried so much.
“I just kept asking myself why me, I’m only 31.”
Bowel Cancer UK explains that you’re “never too young” to have bowel cancer, with around 2,500 younger people being diagnosed with the daunting condition in the UK every year.
Cancer signs and symptoms to look out for include bleeding.
Asherson P, Buitelaar J, Faraone SV, Rohde LA.
Adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: key conceptual issues.
Lancet Psychiatry.
2016;3:568–78.
Sudre G, Mangalmurti A, Shaw P. Growing out of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Insights from the ‘remitted’ brain.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2018;94:198–209.
Aoki Y, Cortese S, Castellanos FX.
Research review: diffusion tensor imaging studies of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: meta-analyses and reflections on head motion.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry.
2018;59:193–202.
Chen L, Hu X, Ouyang L, He N, Liao Y, Liu Q, et al.
A systematic review and meta-analysis of tract-based spatial statistics studies regarding attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2016;68:838–47.
van Ewijk H, Heslenfeld DJ, Zwiers MP, Buitelaar JK, Oosterlaan J. Diffusion tensor imaging in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2012;36:1093–106.
Castellanos FX, Aoki Y. Intrinsic functional connectivity in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a science in development.
Biol Psychiatry.
2016;1:253–61.
Cocchi L, Bramati IE, Zalesky A, Furukawa E, Fontenelle LF, Moll J, et al.
Altered functional brain connectivity in a non-clinical sample of young adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
J Neurosci.
2012;32:17753–61.
Samea F, Soluki S, Nejati V, Zarei M, Cortese S, Eickhoff SB, et al.
Brain alterations in children/adolescents with ADHD revisited: a neuroimaging meta-analysis of 96 structural and functional studies.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2019;100:1–8.
Aoki Y, Yoncheva YN, Chen B, Nath T, Sharp D, Lazar M, et al. Association of white matter structure with autism spectrum disorder and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
JAMA Psychiatry.
2017;74:1120–8.
Rubia K, Alegria A, Brinson H. Imaging the ADHD brain: disorder-specificity, medication effects and clinical translation.
Expert Rev Neurotherapeutics.
2014;14:519–38.
Lin H-Y, Cocchi L, Zalesky A, Lv J, Perry A, Tseng W-YI,
et al. Brain–behavior patterns define a dimensional biotype in medication-naïve adults with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Psychological Med.
2018;48:2399–408.
Deco G, Jirsa VK, McIntosh AR.
Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
Nat Rev Neurosci.
2011;12:43–56.
Honey CJ, Kötter R, Breakspear M, Sporns O. Network structure of cerebral cortex shapes functional connectivity on multiple time scales.
PNAS.
2007;104:10240–5.
Hauser TU, Fiore VG, Moutoussis M, Dolan RJ.
Computational psychiatry of ADHD: neural gain impairments across marrian levels of analysis.
Trends Neurosci.
2016;39:63–73.
Pertermann M, Bluschke A, Roessner V, Beste C.
The modulation of neural noise underlies the effectiveness of methylphenidate treatment in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
BPS: CNNI.
2019;0:743–50. https://www.biologicalpsychiatrycnni.org/article/S2451-9022(19)30080-1/abstract.
Faisal AA, Selen LPJ, Wolpert DM.
Noise in the nervous system.
Nat Rev Neurosci.
2008;9:292–303.
Castellanos FX, Tannock R. Neuroscience of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: the search for endophenotypes.
Nat Rev Neurosci.
2002;3:617.
Kofler MJ, Rapport MD, Sarver DE, Raiker JS, Orban SA, Friedman LM, et al.
Reaction time variability in ADHD: a meta-analytic review of 319 studies.
Clin Psychol Rev. 2013;33:795–811.
Eldar E, Cohen JD, Niv Y.
The effects of neural gain on attention and learning.
Nat Neurosci.
2013;16:1146–53.
Garrett DD, Samanez-Larkin GR, MacDonald SW, Lindenberger U, McIntosh AR, Grady CL.
Moment-to-moment brain signal variability: a next frontier in human brain mapping?
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2013;37:610–24.
Hancock R, Pugh KR, Hoeft F. Neural noise hypothesis of developmental dyslexia.
Trends Cogn Sci. 2017;21:434–48.
Depue BE, Burgess GC, Willcutt EG, Bidwell LC, Ruzic L, Banich MT.
Symptom-correlated brain regions in young adults with combined-type ADHD: Their organization, variability, and relation to behavioral performance.
Psychiatry Res.
2010;182:96–102.
Nomi JS, Schettini E, Voorhies W, Bolt TS, Heller AS, Uddin LQ.
Resting-state brain signal variability in prefrontal cortex is associated with ADHD symptom severity in children.
Front Hum Neurosci.
2018;12:90.
Sørensen L, Eichele T, Van Wageningen H, Plessen KJ, Stevens MC.
Amplitude variability over trials in hemodynamic responses in adolescents with ADHD:
The role of the anterior default mode network and the non-specific role of the striatum.
NeuroImage.
2016;12:397–404.
Gonen-Yaacovi G, Arazi A, Shahar N, Karmon A, Haar S, Meiran N, et al. Increased ongoing neural variability in ADHD.
Cortex.
2016;81:50–63.
del Campo N, Chamberlain SR, Sahakian BJ, Robbins TW.
The roles of dopamine and noradrenaline in the pathophysiology and treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Biol Psychiatry.
2011;69:e145–57.
Faraone SV.
The pharmacology of amphetamine and methylphenidate: relevance to the neurobiology of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and other psychiatric comorbidities.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2018;87:255–70.
Frank MJ, Santamaria A, O’Reilly RC, Willcutt E. Testing computational models of dopamine and noradrenaline dysfunction in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Neuropsychopharmacology.
2007;32:1583.
Kroener S, Chandler LJ, Phillips PEM, Seamans JK.
Dopamine modulates persistent synaptic activity and enhances the signal-to-noise ratio in the prefrontal cortex.
PLoS One.
2009;4:e6507.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2715878/.
Gamo NJ, Wang M, Arnsten AFT.
Methylphenidate and atomoxetine enhance prefrontal function through α2-adrenergic and dopamine D1 receptors.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2010;49:1011–23.
Crossley NA, Mechelli A, Scott J, Carletti F, Fox PT, McGuire P, et al.
The hubs of the human connectome are generally implicated in the anatomy of brain disorders.
Brain.
2014;137:2382–95.
van den Heuvel MP, Sporns O, Collin G, Scheewe T, Mandl RCW, Cahn W, et al.
Abnormal rich club organization and functional brain dynamics in schizophrenia.
JAMA Psychiatry.
2013;70:783.
Deco G, Kringelbach ML.
Great expectations: using whole-brain computational connectomics for understanding neuropsychiatric disorders.
Neuron.
2014;84:892–905.
Schaefer A, Kong R, Gordon EM, Laumann TO, Zuo X-N, Holmes AJ, et al. Local-global parcellation of the human cerebral cortex from intrinsic functional connectivity MRI.
Cereb Cortex.
2018;28:3095–114.
Hagmann P, Cammoun L, Gigandet X, Meuli R, Honey CJ, Wedeen VJ, et al.
Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex.
PLoS Biol.
2008;6:
e159.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2443193/.
Betzel RF, Byrge L, He Y, Goñi J, Zuo X-N, Sporns O. Changes in structural and functional connectivity among resting-state networks across the human lifespan.
NeuroImage.
2014;102:345–57.
Perry A, Wen W, Lord A, Thalamuthu A, Roberts G, Mitchell PB, et al.
The organisation of the elderly connectome.
NeuroImage.
2015;114:414–26.
Heuvel MP, van den, Kahn RS, Goñi J, Sporns O. High-cost, high-capacity backbone for global brain communication.
PNAS.
2012;109:11372–7.
Van der Waerden BL.
Order tests for the two-sample problem and their power.
In Indagationes Mathematicae (Proceedings) (Vol. 55, pp. 453–458).
North-Holland.
Honey CJ, Sporns O, Cammoun L, Gigandet X, Thiran JP, Meuli R, et al.
Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2009;106:2035–40.
Coghill D, Sonuga‐Barke EJS.
Annual research review: categories versus dimensions in the classification and conceptualisation of child and adolescent mental disorders—implications of recent empirical study.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry.
2012;53:469–89.
Demontis D, Walters RK, Martin J, Mattheisen M, Als TD, Agerbo E, et al. Discovery of the first genome-wide significant risk loci for attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Nat Genet.
2019;51:63.
Gau SS-F, Shang C-Y, Liu S-K, Lin C-H, Swanson JM, Liu Y-C, et al.
Psychometric properties of the Chinese version of the Swanson, Nolan, and Pelham, version IV scale—parent form.
Int J Methods Psychiatr Res.
2008;17:35–44.
Yeh C-B, Gau SS-F, Kessler RC, Wu Y-Y. Psychometric properties of the Chinese version of the adult ADHD Self-report Scale.
Int J Methods Psychiatr Res. 2008;17:45–54.
Zalesky A, Fornito A, Bullmore ET.
Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks.
Neuroimage.
2010;53:1197–207.
Rosenthal R, Rosnow RL.
Essentials of behavioral research: methods and data analysis.
New York: McGraw-Hill; 1991.
Barnett L, Buckley CL, Bullock S. Neural complexity and structural connectivity.
Phys Rev E. 2009;79:051914.
Deco G, Ponce-Alvarez A, Mantini D, Romani GL, Hagmann P, Corbetta M. Resting-state functional connectivity emerges from structurally and dynamically shaped slow linear fluctuations.
J Neurosci.
2013;33:11239–52.
Saggio ML, Ritter P, Jirsa VK.
Analytical operations relate structural and functional connectivity in the brain.
PLOS ONE.
2016;11:e0157292.
Friston KJ, Harrison L, Penny W. Dynamic causal modelling.
Neuroimage.
2003;19:1273–302.
Ziegler S, Pedersen ML, Mowinckel AM, Biele G. Modelling ADHD: a review of ADHD theories through their predictions for computational models of decision-making and reinforcement learning.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2016;71:633–56.
Arnsten AFT.
Catecholamine influences on dorsolateral prefrontal cortical networks.
Biol Psychiatry.
2011;69:e89–99.
Volkow ND, Fowler JS, Wang G-J, Telang F, Logan J, Wong C, et al. Methylphenidate decreased the amount of glucose needed by the brain to perform a cognitive task.
PLOS ONE.
2008;3:e2017.
Gollo LL, Roberts JA, Cropley VL, Di Biase MA, Pantelis C, Zalesky A, et al.
Fragility and volatility of structural hubs in the human connectome.
Nat Neurosci.
2018;21:1107.
Cocchi L, Harding IH, Lord A, Pantelis C, Yucel M, Zalesky A. Disruption of structure–function coupling in the schizophrenia connectome.
NeuroImage.
2014;4:779–87.
Skudlarski P, Jagannathan K, Anderson K, Stevens MC, Calhoun VD, Skudlarska BA, et al.
Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
Biol Psychiatry.
2010;68:61–9.
Cole MW, Schneider W. The cognitive control network: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions.
NeuroImage.
2007;37:343–60.
Weissman DH, Roberts KC, Visscher KM, Woldorff MG.
The neural bases of momentary lapses in attention.
Nat Neurosci.
2006;9:971–8.
Fassbender C, Zhang H, Buzy WM, Cortes CR, Mizuiri D, Beckett L, et al.
A lack of default network suppression is linked to increased distractibility in ADHD.
Brain Res. 2009;1273:114–28.
Kelly AMC, Uddin LQ, Biswal BB, Castellanos FX, Milham MP.
Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability.
Neuroimage.
2008;39:527–37.
Liddle EB, Hollis C, Batty MJ, Groom MJ, Totman JJ, Liotti M, et al.
Task-related default mode network modulation and inhibitory control in ADHD: effects of motivation and methylphenidate.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry.
2011;52:761–71.
Rosenberg MD, Zhang S, Hsu W-T, Scheinost D, Finn ES, Shen X, et al.
Methylphenidate modulates functional network connectivity to enhance attention.
J Neurosci.
2016;36:9547–57.
Yoo JH, Kim D, Choi J, Jeong B. Treatment effect of methylphenidate on intrinsic functional brain network in medication-naïve ADHD children: a multivariate analysis.
Brain Imaging Behav.
2018;12:518–31.
Cary RP, Ray S, Grayson DS, Painter J, Carpenter S, Maron L, et al.
Network structure among brain systems in adult ADHD is uniquely modified by stimulant administration.
Cereb Cortex.
2017;27:3970–9.
Lin H-Y, Tseng W-YI, Lai M-C, Matsuo K, Gau SS-F. Altered resting-state frontoparietal control network in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
J Int Neuropsychological Soc.
2015;21:271–84.
Regev M, Simony E, Lee K, Tan KM, Chen J, Hasson U. Propagation of information along the cortical hierarchy as a function of attention while reading and listening to stories.
Cereb Cortex.
2018;29:4017–34.
Stephan KE, Baldeweg T, Friston KJ.
Synaptic plasticity and dysconnection in schizophrenia.
Biol Psychiatry.
2006;59:929–39.
Bos DJ, Oranje B, Achterberg M, Vlaskamp C, Ambrosino S, de Reus MA, et al.
Structural and functional connectivity in children and adolescents with and without attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry.
2017;58:810–8.
Yendiki A, Koldewyn K, Kakunoori S, Kanwisher N, Fischl B. Spurious group differences due to head motion in a diffusion MRI study.
NeuroImage. 2014;88:79–90.
de Luis-García R, Cabús-Piñol G, Imaz-Roncero C, Argibay-Quiñones D, Barrio-Arranz G, Aja-Fernández S, et al.
Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and medication with stimulants in young children: a DTI study.
Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry.
2015;57:176–84.
Adisetiyo V, Tabesh A, Martino AD, Falangola MF, Castellanos FX, Jensen JH, et al. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder without comorbidity is associated with distinct atypical patterns of cerebral microstructural development.
Hum Brain Mapp.
2014;35:2148–62.
Greene DJ, Black KJ, Schlaggar BL.
Considerations for MRI study design and implementation in pediatric and clinical populations.
Developmental Cogn Neurosci.
2016;18:101–12.
Arthritis diet: Three of the best spices to avoid arthritis symptoms
Moving your eyes from the palm of your hand up to the fingertips, what shape are they?
Clubbed fingers, which is when they're wider and thicker at the top than the bottom, could indicate fatty liver disease.
As the liver struggles to function, the nails might turn white in colouring.
Another indication of a scarred liver is when the hands begin to tremble – an involuntary shaking that seemingly occurs out of nowhere.
READ MORE: Princess Anne 'playful' body language with Zara's children different
COVID-19 and the flu are respiratory viruses that have a somewhat similar effect on the body, leading to symptoms such as fever, cough, sore throat, runny nose, sneezing and more.
They may differ in their degree of risks and severity but are transmitted through aerosol droplets or smaller virus particles, causing infections in the respiratory route either directly by contact or through contaminated surfaces.
Also read: COVID precautionary dose: Dos and don'ts to follow before scheduling your third dose
One way to differentiate between the two infections is to note how efficiently they spread from one person to another.
Experts believe the SARs-CoV-2 virus spreads more easily and more quickly than the flu and causes more serious illnesses in some people.
Apart from that, while some flu and COVID symptoms may overlap, there are some symptoms like shortness of breath, loss of sense of smell or taste that act as primary differentiators.
They can occur with a COVID-19 infection, but not in the case of a flu infection.
Similarly, headaches, nausea are less prevalent in COVID-19, but are classic symptoms of the flu.
It feels like everyone, including President Joe Biden, has caught the omicron variant.
The new COVID-19 subvariant BA.5 quickly became the dominant strain behind nearly 80% of all cases in the United States.
Hospitalization numbers saw a 4.3% increase since last week, with the current seven-day average at more than 6,200 cases.
The number is still lower than the omicron wave in January, when hospital admissions reached over 21,000, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention tracker.
Daily cases have reached over 140,000 in the U.S., but experts believe that the actual number could be seven times higher because of the popularity of at-home COVID-19 tests and a lack of reporting when the result of an at-home test is positive, as I previously reported.
Related New omicron variants target lungs and escape antibodies
What do BA.5 symptoms look like?
Dr. Claire Taylor, a general practitioner in the United Kingdom, took to Twitter to talk about her experience when her family was reinfected with what she suspects was BA.5.
She wrote that her family had omicron 12 weeks ago.
Although she expected a reinfection, she said she was surprised to get sick again “so quickly.”
When Taylor’s 9-year-old son with a temperature of 101.84 complained about “a painful stiff neck,” she thought it was meningitis, which causes swelling around the brain and spinal cord.
But a painful stiff neck isn’t commonly seen in omicron patients, Dr. Julianne Burns, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at Stanford Children’s Health in San Francisco, told Insider.
COVID-19 symptoms cause more “general body aches,” she added.
The worst of it is a severely sore throat, UCSF’s Dr. Peter Chin-Hong told ABC 7 Bay Area.
“Like their throat is on fire with BA.5,” said Chin-Hong.
“We hear it’s the worst sore throat they’ve had.”
What are the top omicron symptoms?
Omicron subvariants have a shorter incubation period, which is why the symptoms may appear earlier.
The most common omicron-related symptoms are:
Cough.
Fatigue.
Congestion.
Runny nose.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has listed common symptoms for COVID-19.
The symptoms are:
Fever or chills.
Cough.
Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing.
Fatigue.
Muscle or body aches.
Headache.
New loss of taste or smell.
Sore throat.
Congestion or runny nose.
Nausea or vomiting.
Diarrhea.
Is the BA.5 omicron subvariant very contagious?
Although BA.4 and BA.5 aren’t associated with a more severe infection, they do have the ability to evade antibodies acquired through vaccines or a previous infection, which makes it highly contagious, according to the University of California, Health.
The mutations that these new subvariants have are a result of masses acquiring antibodies and “the high level of immunity in the population is likely exerting selection pressure on the virus and the virus is evolving to try to get around that immunity,” Daniel Barouch, director of the Center for Virology and Vaccine Research at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, told Vox.
Are you protected from infection if you’ve had omicron before?
A recent study that evaluated cases in Qatar showed that while any previous infection from COVID-19’s original strains offers some protection, a prior omicron infection fights against the BA.4 and BA.5 more effectively.
Study co-author Laith Abu-Raddad, an infectious-disease epidemiologist at Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar in Doha, along with other researchers, analyzed cases in the country between May and July this year — around the time that BA.4 and BA.5 started causing a surge in cases.
“The immunity you’re getting from these omicron infections actually protects you from other Omicron sub-lineages to some extent,” Alex Sigal, a virologist at the Africa Health Research Institute in Durban, South Africa, told Nature.
“COVID is everywhere,” he added.
“It can easily evolve into a new variant.”
Can you get reinfected with the new omicron subvariant?
Dr. Anthony Fauci, the president’s chief medical adviser, explained in a press briefing that since June of last year, “successive variants, due to mutational changes, have essentially bumped one variant off the table after the other, leading to the broader category of omicron — where we are right now.”
But, he continued, omicron is a bigger problem than other variants, like alpha, beta and delta.
“Omicron, as a broad category, has multiple sublineages with BA.1, BA.2, BA.2.12.1.
And now, what we’re currently challenged with is the BA.4, 5 — particularly the BA.5,” he said, adding that these successive subvariants are more transmissible than the original COVID-19 strains.
Do vaccines work against the new omicron strains?
The latest study from the University of Geneva explored the omicron variant and its interaction with the immune system.
Researchers found that this COVID-19 mutation has the ability to evade antibodies generated by the original or delta strain.
But those who are vaccinated will have antibodies that remain “far superior to natural immunity alone,” per Science Daily.
The study goes on to state that antibody levels are 10 times higher through vaccination.
“Thus, omicron can evade existing immunity and cause an infection, but hospitalisation and death due to COVID-19, even with omicron, is still reduced after vaccination,” said Isabella Eckerie, a professor in the Department of Medicine at the UNIGE Faculty of Medicine, who led the study.
What are other new omicron subvariants?
Omicron was deemed a variant of concern, with some of its lineages — BA.2.75, BA.13, BA.2.11, BA.2.9.1, BA.2.12.1, BA.4 and BA.5 — being closely monitored.
The newest omicron subvariant is BA.2.75, also known as “centauraus,” with many new mutations that could leave to a wave of its own, as the Deseret News reported.
G oing dairy-free has become an increasingly buzzy topic in many circles, and not just those that include vegans.
“While about two and a half percent of the general population have a food allergy, about 15 to 20 percent have a food sensitivity or intolerance,” says oing dairy-free has become an increasingly buzzy topic in many circles, and not just those that include vegans.
“While about two and a half percent of the general population have a food allergy, about 15 to 20 percent have a food sensitivity or intolerance,” says Purvi Parikh, MD , an allergist with the Allergy & Asthma Network .
But when we’re talking about dairy specifically, numbers skyrocket.
“Somewhere in the range of 60 to 70 percent of the general population is lactose intolerant, and that number is over 80 percent in certain parts of the world such as Asia, according to gastroenterologist Akash Goel , MD, assistant professor of medicine in the gastroenterology and hepatology division at Weill Cornell.
Experts In This Article Purvi Parikh, MD, allergist, immunologist, and medical advisor with the Allergy & Asthma Network
The difference between dairy allergy symptoms and lactose intolerance symptoms
According to Dr. Parikh, those afflicted with a dairy allergy generally experience a rash, itching, and swelling within 30 to 60 minutes of ingesting dairy.
"This may or may not be accompanied by nausea, vomiting, stomach cramps, diarrhea, dizziness, and loss of consciousness," she says.
When you’re dealing with a sensitivity, such as lactose intolerance, symptoms are limited to gas, bloating, stomach cramps, and diarrhea, which appear within 30 minutes to up to two hours after eating dairy.
“There is overlap in terms of the possible gastrointestinal symptoms, but the key differentiator is with allergies you’ll also get those skin symptoms,” Dr. Parikh explains.
"Regardless, if you're experiencing any of the symptoms above, it’s important to see a board-certified allergist to determine if you have a true allergy or not, as allergies can be life threatening.
Sensitivities may be unpleasant, but they are not usually dangerous.
"
Related Stories
Dairy allergies and sensitivities are caused by different things, too
“Food sensitivity is a side effect of a food or difficulty digesting or metabolizing a food,” says Dr. Parikh.
A sensitivity to dairy is, specifically, a sensitivity to lactose.
“Lactose is a natural sugar found in dairy products,” says Dr. Goel.
“When this sugar is not broken down, it gets fermented by gut bacteria, with gas by products leading to the downstream consequences of the symptoms discussed.”
A dairy allergy, by contrast, is an immune response.
“Since the presentation for cow's milk allergy is fairly dramatic, these are typically diagnosed and found in infancy, and are fairly common—roughly two percent of babies may have a cow's milk allergy.
The immune system in this case is typically reacting to one of the proteins in dairy such as whey or casein,” Dr. Goel adds.
But according to the doctor, there is a caveat: Just because you don’t feel great after having Greek yogurt or cheese doesn’t mean you have a sensitivity to dairy.
“If there is a fever or chills involved, it could be an infection,” says Dr. Parikh.
“If pain is sudden, sharp, or severe and painful to the touch, it could be an emergency such as appendicitis, ovarian torsion/rupture, pelvic inflammatory disease or ectopic pregnancy and rupture.”
Or, maybe you just ate too much brie.
(It happens to the best of us!)
By the way, if you're suddenly stressing about prevention, don't.
The only proven way to reduce the risk of developing a food allergy, based on the landmark LEAP study, is early introduction to the common allergens before the age of one.
The good news?
There are so many delicious dairy-free foods on the market—ideal for those with or without a dairy intolerance.
Ice cream?
Check.
Cheese?
Check.
Milk?
Check.
Check.
Check.
Ringworm of the scalp is a contagious infection.
It's most common in toddlers and school-age children.
Tinea capitis is related to athlete's foot (tinea pedis), jock itch (tinea cruris) and ringworm of the body (tinea corporis).
Medication taken by mouth can kill the fungus that causes ringworm of the scalp.
Medicated shampoos may help keep a person from spreading the infection to others.
opioid tablets
Deaths skyrocketing from the nation’s opioid crisis overshadows another growing nightmare for communities and families across the United States: the long-term health effects of nonfatal opioid overdoses.
In a new review paper in International Journal of Drug Policy, Janna Ataiants, DrPH, a senior research scientist, Stephen Lankenau, PhD, professor and associate dean for research, both in the Dornsife School of Public Health, and their colleagues, go beyond opioid-associated deaths and look at previous studies on how an opioid overdose affects brain function and risk behaviors.
The team found a body of knowledge showing that a history of overdoses can lead to neurodegeneration, then feed into risky behaviors and may ultimately result in a new overdose.
“Many people still think of opioid overdose as a strictly life-or-death issue, but fatal overdoses constitute only 3-4% of all overdoses and repeated nonfatal overdoses may have far-reaching consequences for survivors,” said Ataiants.
“We need to acknowledge how nonfatal overdoses attack brain cells, perhaps to the point of bringing on symptoms similar to those of Alzheimer’s disease.”
It’s easy to see why nonfatal overdoes are often left out of the conversation when talking about opioids.
Overdose deaths have quadrupled since 1999 and there were more than 100,000 drug overdose deaths in a year for the first time ever, from April 2019 to April 2020, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently reported.
Despite this, the authors argue a need for accurate numbers on the broad scope of the nation’s opioid crisis.
“Typically, only overdoses that result in trips to an emergency room are tracked, and it leaves out a lot of cases,” said Ataiants.
“This lack of tracking of repeated nonfatal overdoses makes it impossible to get an accurate picture of the magnitude of these cases.”
The team looked at the previous research, documenting a possible interconnection between the biochemical, brain and behavior side effects from overdoses that work in conjunction to cause the brain decline that leads to additional, unsafe drug use.
“We found strong evidence in the literature that opioid overdoses lead to these Alzheimer’s-like pathologies in the brain,” said Lankenau, who is senior author on the paper.
“We also know that these processes in the body may progress for decades before these symptoms are evident, because of lower rates of health care access for many of those who use opioids.”
The authors note that many questions remain about how much this brain deterioration influences the odds of another overdose and whether these nonfatal overdoses can cause Alzheimer’s disease — and if so, whether one overdose is sufficient to cause the early stages of Alzheimer-like side effects, and how the severity of an overdose and total number of overdoses can induce these side effects.
This research comes at a time when American Medical Association experts are linking the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic to a rise in overdose deaths.
And the nation’s first overdose prevention center recently opened in New York City, aimed at reducing opioid deaths and offering those struggling with substance use disorders a link to addiction treatment services.
During an overdose, there are implications for much of the body, including impaired blood circulation, brain, heart and lung function.
Signs include loss of consciousness, change in skin color, irregular or no heartbeat and inability to talk, among other symptoms.
If you see someone experiencing an overdose, among other steps, call 911 immediately.
KNOW THE SIGNS Cancer: The ‘fleeting’ symptom you should always get checked out – and 5 other signs to look out for
ONE of the barriers to an early cancer diagnosis is that the symptoms are so difficult to spot.
They can go unrecognised for far too long.
1 Men's testicular cancer symptoms may "come and go" Credit:
Alamy
In the case of testicular cancer, signs may be “fleeting”, experts say, meaning they are not always there.
If you ever find yourself questioning some bizarre and new symptoms, it’s always best to get it checked out as soon as possible.
There are a handful of general symptoms which apply to almost all cancer patients - pain, night sweats, unexplained weight loss, a lump or swelling or fatigue.
The NHS says: “It's important to be aware of any new or worrying symptoms.
“Although it's unlikely to be cancer, it's important to speak to a GP so they can investigate.”
Testicular cancer is rare but diagnosed in around 2,354 men every year, causing 60 deaths.
In the UK, 99 per cent of men survive for a year or more after being diagnosed, while 98 per cent survive for five or more years.
One in every 215 men in the UK will be diagnosed with testicular cancer in their lifetime, usually between the ages of 15 and 50.
The main symptom is a painless swelling or lump in one of the testicles - which is why it’s important to check the scrotum regularly to become familiar with what it should feel like.
The swelling or lump can be about the size of a pea, but may be larger.
Secondly, a change in shape or texture of the testicles may also be an early sign.
Other less common symptoms of testicular cancer include firmness, a difference in appearance and a feeling of heaviness.
But there is one symptom that “may come and go”, the NHS says.
Sometimes people with the disease experience bouts of a dull ache or sharp pain in the testicles or scrotum.
Former NHS worker Michael Carson told the Express: “There can occasionally be some fleeting pain, but generally there is none; just a change in the texture or shape of the testicles and lump that can be felt.”
It’s vital to get checked just in case.
But usually, pain in the testicle wouldn’t be cancer.
It could be due to inflammation (orchitis or epididymitis) fluid build-up (hydrocele) or kidney stones.
Most lumps on the scrotum tend to be caused by something else, too, for example swollen blood vessels (varicoceles) or cysts.
Treatment of testicular cancer tends to involve the surgical removal of the affected testicle, but this can be replaced with a prosthetic one.
If both testicles are removed, the patient will be left infertile - but some men can bank their sperm before this happens.
After surgery chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy is used to treat testicular cancer if further treatment is required.
How do you check your testicles?
First it's important to know what feels normal.
It's a good idea to have a hot shower before checking them, then gently roll your testicle between your thumb and finger.
Then repeat for the other testicle.
Repeat this every week so you get a feel for their shape and size.
Something went wrong, please try again later.
Invalid email Something went wrong, please try again later.
Keep up to date with the latest stories with our WalesOnline newsletter
Something went wrong, please try again later.
Keep up to date with the latest stories with our WalesOnline newsletter
The Omicron variant has traditional Covid 19 symptoms but there may be non-traditional signs to look out for, according to new government data.
Omicron is driving up cases across the UK, with a further 3,201 new cases reported in the latest 24-hour period.
Recognising the symptoms and self-isolating if you spot them can help to stem the spread of the highly transmissible variant.
However, an apparent unwillingness to expand the "official" list of symptoms is impeding this effort.
That's the obvious takeaway from the data gathered by the ZOE Covid Symptom study, which has been monitoring the impact of the ascendant variant.
Using the most recent data from London, where Omicron prevalence is higher than other regions of the UK, ZOE data scientists analysed symptom data from positive cases recorded in the ZOE Covid Study and compared with data from early October when Delta was dominant.
The analysis revealed that only 50 percent of people experienced the classic three symptoms of fever, cough, or loss of sense of smell or taste, according to an article in The Daily Express.
Among the non-classic symptoms reported was a loss of appetite.
These findings line up with a small batch of data from contributors who reported that their positive PCR results were suspected or confirmed Omicron infections.
"This may come as a surprise to some, as the UK government never updated guidance on COVID symptoms beyond the classic three symptoms.
Many months ago, the ZOE Covid Study helped to identify over 20, mostly mild, cold-like symptoms," noted the ZOE scientists.
The top five symptoms reported in the app were:
Runny Nose
Headache
Fatigue
Sneezing
Sore Throats
Brain fog was also commonly reported in the data.
A vague term to describe a sense of confusion, forgetfulness, and a lack of focus and mental clarity.
Every report in the app builds on this data and the scientists will be conducting more research into the symptom profile of Omicron in the coming weeks.
Even as cases rise, the proportion of hospitalisations and deaths seems to be dropping in most countries where Omicron has been detected.
The same is true of the analysis conducted by the ZOE team of London, although there is often a delay between catching Covid and being hospitalised with complications, so this might change in the coming weeks.
"So far, we’ve had no reports from people who have been hospitalised or suffered severe symptoms with a suspected Omicron infection," noted the ZOE scientists.
In fact, there’s been an eight drop in UK Covid hospitalisations from 987.7 a week on the 15th of November to 811 a week on the 15th of December.
(Image: PA)
However, it is still early days and the majority of contributors to the ZOE app are vaccinated, which will likely explain why we have yet to see hospitalisations or severe disease.
Meanwhile, the Government is urging Britons to roll up their sleeves and get vaccinated with a booster shot, which has been shown to offer a substantial top up of protection.
Around 25 million people in the UK have now had their Covid-19 booster vaccine or third dose.
Health and Social Care Secretary Sajid Javid said: "One thing is absolutely clear – we have no time to waste in the race between virus and the vaccine.
Booster jabs are absolutely critical for strengthening our defences, and today’s milestone of 25 million top-up jabs is a testament to the enthusiasm of people up and down the country who are rolling up their sleeves to get boosted now.
"I want to say a heartfelt thank you to everyone working on this national mission across all corners of the United Kingdom – from the brilliant NHS and Armed Forces to the tens of thousands of heroic volunteers who have signed up to help with deployment of our booster vaccines.
"
This week also saw the temporary suspension of the 15-minute observation period following administration of Pfizer and Moderna vaccines, in a bid to help get jabs in arms more quickly with rising cases of Omicron.
The advice from the four UK Chief Medical Officers includes first, second and booster jabs and will be kept under review.
For more stories from where you live, visit InYourArea.
Home
Health
Dengue New Strain DEN 2: 5 Symptoms and Ways to Increase Platelet Count
Dengue New Strain DEN 2: 5 Symptoms and Ways to Increase Platelet Count
Dengue DEN 2 strain has been found amid already rising cases in the country.
Here is a mini guide to know all symptoms, preventions and ways to improve platelet count.
Dengue cases are witnessing a steep rise in cases across India.
Few deaths have also been reported due to dengue in Kolkata.
This time the surge in cases is being ascribed to DEN-2 strain of the mosquito-borne virus.
It was recently detected in samples sent from Noida.
According to experts, DEN-1 strain causes a headache, fever, chills but DEN-2 leads to high fever, vomiting, etc.
So far no deaths have been reported attributed to the new starting but concern are on the rise based on its severity.
HOW SEVERE IS DEN 2?
Doctors have surely expressed their concerns and attribute the new strain as dangerous.
There are four dengue virus – DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, and DENV-4.
But among these DEN-2 is the one causing the rise in cases this year and is the most severe one too.
It is said that in severe cases, it may even cause dengue haemorrhagic fever.
As per experts, DENV-2 can also lead to dengue shock syndrome or multi-organ failure.
The risk of complication are slightly higher if infected with this new strain.
While there have been no fatalities of haemorrhagic fever so far, doctors have advised staying cautious because it is a severe strain.
DENGUE FEVER SYMPTOMS AND PREVENTION
High Fever Nausea Vomiting Pain behind eyes Joint pain Persistent headache
Prevention
Wear full sleeves clothes and lowers
Maintain proper hygiene
Keep surroundings clear
Do not allow water to stagnate
Wear mosquito repellants
Eat immunity-boosting food
Stay hydrated
HOW TO INCREASE PLATELET COUNT
Increase Fluid Intake: Hydration is important to maintain a balance of electrolytes in the body.
Increased fluid consumption also helps to remove toxins from the body, aiding in faster recovery.
Make Green Veggies Your Friend: Even though not a favourite, green leafy vegetables should be included in every day meals.
These vegetables are powerhouse of all the nutrients that are required to improve the blood platelet count and increase recovery speed.
Fruits to Eat: Fruits are also important for platelets.
To increase platelets one should have fruits rich in nutrients, vitamin C, Vitamin A, antioxidants, and fibre.
It may help to also maintain gut health boosting immunity as well.
Kiwis, cherries, apples can be added in your fruit bowl to recovery.
Probiotcs: Probiotic food helps majorly in digestion.
It improves the gut bacteria.
Yoghurt, soybeans, kefir, and buttermilk may help to boost immunity as well.
WHAT HAPPENS INSIDE OUR BODIES WHEN INFECTED WITH DENGUE VIRUS?
The virus enters the body through the bite of an infected mosquito, typically the Aedes aegypti mosquito.
The virus then replicates within the body, primarily targeting immune cells called monocytes and macrophages.
there are different phases how the virus spreads.
The initial phase of dengue infection is known as the febrile phase, which typically lasts for about 2-5 days.
During this phase, the virus multiplies and spreads throughout the body.
It is best to take all necessary precautions and raise our guards against the infection!
For breaking news and live news updates, like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
Read more on Latest Health News on India.com.
Researchers at the University of Sydney discovered that Australians born overseas who spoke a first language other than English could tolerate neurodegeneration longer before behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD) symptoms begin to show, according to a study published in the Journal of Neurology.
“Our findings suggest that current diagnostic methods might be less accurate at identifying symptoms in Australians from culturally diverse backgrounds,” said Amira Skeggs, the lead investigator of the study.
“When it comes to neurodegenerative syndromes like bvFTD, culturally diverse people can have a later onset of the disease compared to monolingual Australians because they have other factors which could increase their resilience or cognitive reserve.”
The authors then present the “cognitive reserve hypothesis,” which proposes that people from non-English speaking backgrounds maintain a more extensive cognitive reserve due to bilingualism, among other factors.
This “reserve” hypothetically allows them to endure disease progression for longer before symptoms typical of bvFTD begin to show.
To evaluate the validity of the hypothesis, researchers recruited 158 participants from FRONTIER, the largest FTD specialist clinic in Australia.
51 of the participants were volunteers without FTD who served as controls.
All of the participants in the study took part in a comprehensive exam that included a neuropsychological assessment, an MRI scan, and screening by a behavioral neurologist.
Researchers employed a common cognitive exam to assess participants.
They used other examinations to check things such as memory and attention before running the results through a series of statistical analyses.
There were no significant differences between disease duration, the age of diagnosis, or the severity of bvFTD.
While not considered statistically significant, researchers noted that the age of onset for people with a first language other than English was older.
More significant were the scores for non-verbal assessments.
“Comparisons revealed that the group who spoke a non-English first language performed worse than the other groups on verbal tests but better on non-verbal tests,” said Skeggs.
“The poor verbal performance in the non-English speaking group is probably influenced by cultural biases within current clinical tests, so the reason they are showing decline may not actually be because they are declining.”
The cultural bias within current clinical tests poses a significant problem for diverse populations worldwide, the researchers said.
Without adjusting criteria for non-Western languages and cultures, Skeggs notes that “it can be difficult to diagnose the diseases in non-Western people because they may not have the same symptoms.
“There is also some evidence that non-English-speaking patients are diagnosed at a later age, potentially due to a delay in clinical diagnosis or cognitive reserve slowing the disease onset,” Skeggs said.
The study notes the pressing need to include diverse populations in FTD research to address the roots of these diagnostic shortcomings, such as how FTD’s presentation changes across cultures.
Did you know that researchers have also conducted studies evaluating the efficacy of cognitive exams?
Click here to learn more.
Lung cancer: Changes in your armpit could signal the deadly disease
A hoarse voice or a changing of the voice is not a common known symptom of lung cancer, with only 1 percent of people in the UK identifying it in a symptom awareness survey conducted by the Global Lung Cancer Coalition.
Roy Castle Lung Cancer Foundation explains: “A tickle.
A croak.
A frog in your throat.
There are so many ways to describe a hoarse voice.
“We all experience hoarseness at some point in our lives, perhaps after shouting at a football match or speaking for a prolonged period of time.
However, if you are experiencing unexplained hoarseness or a weakening of your voice – it could be a sign of lung cancer.”
It continues: “Hoarseness can be caused by a lung cancer tumour pressing on the laryngeal nerve – which is in the chest – causing a paralysis or weakening of the nerve, and sometimes resulting in paralysis of a vocal cord.
READ MORE:
Fatty liver disease symptoms: The visual warning sign on your legs, ankles and feet
​Runny or stuffy nose
Runny nose is a discharge of mucus from the nose.
Stuffy nose is when there is a blockage in the nasal passage.
Studies have shown that severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) correlates with lymphopenia and low T cell concentrations, and mild COVID-19 correlates with a strong T cell response to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection.
While most individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 produce neutralizing antibodies, the effectiveness of this antibody response may be partly compromised by the loss of CD4 T follicular helper cells and increased extrafollicular B cell expansion seen in severe COVID-19.
The immune response to SARS-CoV-2 also includes innate immune cytokine release, including IL6, IL8, and 26 CXCL10/IP10.
IP-10 shows strong correlation with severe clinical outcomes and CXCR3 has been shown to be involved in the trafficking of antiviral T cells to tissue compartments.
How does HIV infection affect COVID-19 disease?
Not much is known about how HIV modulates the immune response to COVID-19.
HIV can cause dysregulation of T cell responses, which in turn can cause B cell dysregulation and dysfunction.
Thus, HIV co-infection will likely change the COVID-19 immune response.
Epidemiological studies have obtained mixed results on the interaction of HIV and SARS-CoV-2.
Many extensive studies have observed that HIV co-infection can increase mortality risk in COVID-19 by approximately 1.5 to 3-fold, while most of these studies found no statistically significant changes in clinical presentation.
Study characteristics.
(A) Study timeline.
(B) Time from symptom onset or diagnostic swab to study enrollment for symptomatic participants.
Left panel shows time elapsed for HIV negative (blue points) and PLWH (red points) between symptom onset and enrollment.
Middle panel shows days from the time the diagnostic swab was taken to enrollment for HIV negative and PLWH.
Right panel shows time difference between symptom onset and diagnostic swab.
(C) Percentage of participants attending follow-up visits for all participants (green), HIV negative (blue), and PLWH (red).
(D) Number of visits (from a total of 5 study time-points per participant) for each participants.
Median and IQR for all participants (green), HIV negative (blue), and PLWH (red).
*Important notice: medRxiv publishes preliminary scientific reports that are not peer-reviewed and, therefore, should not be regarded as conclusive, guide clinical practice/health-related behavior, or treated as established information.
Impact of HIV on COVID-19 immune response in an African region with high HIV prevalence
In a preprint paper published on the medRxiv* server, a team of researchers from various institutions in South Africa, the UK, and Europe discuss how they determined the impact of HIV on the COVID-19 immune response in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, which is an area with very high HIV prevalence.
The researchers believe that this study will help understand the long-term consequences of COVID-19 infection and the vaccination response in this population.
The team investigated used four longitudinal samples from 124 study participants from KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa.
44% of the participants were people living with HIV and had other co-morbidities such as hypertension, obesity, and diabetes.
COVID-19 immune response differed significantly between people living with HIV and HIV negative participants
Most people living with HIV showed CD8 T cell expansion above the normal range after a SARS-CoV-2 infection.
In participants who underwent antiretroviral therapy to suppress HIV, CD8 expansion was associated with milder COVID-19 disease.
There were many differences in T cell, B cell, and natural killer cell correlations in people living with HIV and participants who were HIV negative.
Lower tissue homing CXCR3+ CD8 T cells in the presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA was seen in people living with HIV, but not in HIV negative participants.
There was a pronounced early antibody-secreting cell expansion in HIV-negative individuals, while this was absent in people living with HIV.
Low CXCR3 correlated with increased COVID-19 severity across groups, while high antibody-secreting cells correlated with increased disease severity in HIV negative individuals and waned once SARS-CoV-2 was cleared.
HIV infection status did not affect the severity of COVID-19 disease
Overall, the results show that despite the altered immune response, COVID-19 disease was mostly mild in people living with HIV, similar to participants who were HIV negative.
This is likely a reflection of the heterogeneity of an effective COVID-19 immune response.
It is yet to be determined if the differences in immune responses in people living with HIV will compromise vaccination or lead to different long-term consequences.
“We have shown that HIV infection changed the immune cell response but not clinical outcomes or symptoms of COVID-19 infection.”
The researchers also observed that HIV viremia affects the COVID-19 immune response in people living with HIV, including consistently elevated CD8 T cell levels whether or not SARS-CoV-2 RNA is present and the lack of CD4 T cell recovery after SARS-CoV-2 clearance.
Hence, effective ART suppression likely has a role in attenuating the effects of HIV infection on the immune response to COVID-19.
“Given that COVID-19 infection outcomes were similar in PLWH relative to HIV negative participants, the differences in immune response between the groups may indicate an alternative, as opposed to dysregulated, immunity to SARS-CoV-2 in PLWH.”
*Important notice: medRxiv publishes preliminary scientific reports that are not peer-reviewed and, therefore, should not be regarded as conclusive, guide clinical practice/health-related behavior, or treated as established information.
What is heart disease?
Heart disease is a variety of issues that can affect your heart.
When people think about heart disease, they often think of the most common type — coronary artery disease (CAD) and the heart attacks it can cause.
But you can have trouble with different parts of your heart, like your heart muscle, valves or electrical system.
When your heart isn’t working well, it has trouble sending enough blood, oxygen and nutrients to your body.
In a way, your heart delivers the fuel that keeps your body’s systems running.
If there’s a problem with delivering that fuel, it affects everything your body’s systems do.
Lifestyle changes and medications can keep your heart healthy and lower your chances of getting heart disease.
What are the types of heart disease?
Heart disease types include:
How common is heart disease?
Heart disease is the top cause of death in the United States.
In 2021, heart disease caused 1 in 5 deaths.
That’s nearly 700,000 people.
Coronary artery disease, the most common type of heart disease, caused about 375,000 of those deaths.
Heart disease affects people from most ethnic backgrounds, regardless of sex.
KNOW THE SIGNS 11 symptoms and warning signs of meningitis to watch out for as five new cases confirmed in Ireland this week
IRISH health officials have reported five new cases of viral meningitis this week.
Ireland has seen a string of meningitis cases in recent months and a number of deaths related to the illness.
2 Meningitis can cause severe illness and death Credit: Getty Images - Getty
2 Meningitis infection is most serious in children and young adults Credit: Getty Images - Getty
The latest meningitis figures were revealed in the HPSC's infectious disease report for the week of December 11 to December 17.
In that week, the HPSC recorded five cases of confirmed viral meningitis and zero cases of bacterial meningitis.
Two of these cases were in children aged under 4-years-Old, two were in adults aged between 35 and 44 and one was in an adult aged over 65.
All five of the cases were in males.
Additionally, there were two cases of meningococcal disease in the same week.
One was in a child aged under 4-years-old and one was in a child aged between ten and 14.
In October, the HSE was investigating four cases of meningococcal meningitis/septicaemia reported in the last week of September.
A total of 3 cases were confirmed and one was possible.
Three of the cases were reported to be caused by serogroup B. Sadly, two of the people affected died.
What is meningitis?
It is an infection of the lining of the brain and spinal cord.
There are two main types of meningitis: bacterial and viral.
The germs that cause bacterial meningitis can also cause septicaemia (blood poisoning).
Like meningitis, septicaemia is a serious illness that can be life-threatening.
Bacterial meningitis is more severe.
It can be life threatening and it requires medical attention quickly.
Anyone can get meningitis; however, babies, young children and teenagers are mainly affected.
What are the symptoms?
A high temperature.
A temperature of 38C or higher or cold hands and feet and is shivering.
Dislikes bright lights.
Squints or covers their eyes when exposed to light.
Headache and neck stiffness.
Pain or body stiffness.
This includes stomach, joint or muscle pain, jerking movements or a floppy lifeless body.
Vomiting or difficult eating and diarrhoea
Confusion, tiredness or irritability.
Pale or bluish skin colour.
Unusual breathing.
A tense or bulging soft spot on the head - in children and babies.
Seizures.
Rash that doesn’t fade when you press a glass tumbler against it.
How bacterial meningitis spreads
Bacterial meningitis is spread by prolonged close contact between people.
The germ can be coughed out and breathed in.
It can also be transferred in saliva, for example during intimate kissing.
The infection is usually spread by people who are not sick themselves.
They carry the germs at the back of their nose or throat.
VACCINATION
Meningococcal B disease is prevented by vaccination.
The MenB vaccine was introduced in Ireland for all children born on or after 1 October 2016 because children under one year are at the highest risk of meningococcal B disease.
All children are offered MenB vaccine at 2 and 4 months of age with a booster dose of MenB vaccine given at 12 months.
The HSE advises that if anyone has any concerns they should contact their GP in the first instance but ensure that medical expertise is sought quickly.
Why are cases on a rise?
Common symptoms to not ignore
Fever
Sore throat
Running nose
Cough
Body ache
Myalgia (muscle pain or aches)
Fatigue
Diarrhea
Symptoms in severe COVID cases
Shortness of breath
Low oxygen saturation
Respiratory distress
Not a panic-like situation yet
Preventive measures to avoid getting infected
Keep a physical distance of at least 1 meter from others, even if they don’t appear to be sick.
Avoid crowds and close contact.
Wear a properly fitted mask when physical distancing is not possible and in poorly ventilated settings.
Clean your hands frequently with alcohol-based hand rub or soap and water.
Cover your mouth and nose with a bent elbow or tissue when you cough or sneeze.
Dispose of used tissues immediately and clean hands regularly.
If you develop symptoms or test positive for COVID-19, self-isolate until you recover.
According to Union Health Ministry data updated on Thursday, India recorded 12,591 new COVID cases in a day, the highest in around eight months, PTI reported.
Further, the active case burden increased to 65,286.As per the data updated at 8 am, the death toll has also increased to 5,31,230 with 40 fatalities, which includes 11 reconciled by Kerala.
The total tally of COVID cases was recorded at 4.48 crore.
Medical experts say the new XBB.1.16 variant of the virus could be driving the surge.
In India, XBB.1.16 or Arcturus has replaced other variants, as per a WHO report.
XBB.1.16 variant, is a sub-lineage of the Omicron variant.
The new XBB1.16 variant is able to evade the immune system of people, as per medical experts.
Currently, the dominant COVID symptoms are similar to those of previous variants.
These include:According to health experts, those getting a serious COVID infection can develop troubling symptoms like:Former director of AIIMS, Delhi, Dr Randeep Guleria, said even though the country is seeing a fresh surge in COVID-19 infections, the situation is not one to panic.
"Covid-19
cases have been on the rise across the country.
But the majority of the infections are mild.
The rate of hospitalisation hasn't gone up either.
It's not a panic-like situation yet," Guleria told ANI.Following guidelines are shares by he World Health Organization to help you protect yourself from getting infected:
In the spring of 2009, Drea Mizer was vacationing in Hawaii when something felt off.
"Felt really tired, had not a lot of energy, some lower back pain, and I honestly just thought 'Oh I'm dehydrated,' " Mizer told KING 5.
She brushed it off.
But weeks later, her cat, Sam, made her think again.
"My cat kept jumping on me, pawing on me, and I said, man that actually hurts; pawing at the abdomen area so I felt it, and there was a really large, hard mass there," Mizer said.
That mass turned out to be ovarian cancer.
She went to her doctor and received an ultrasound and a CT scan, which led to her stage-four ovarian cancer diagnosis.
Mizer was 32 years old at the time.
Doctors immediately started her on aggressive treatment.
"I said, I'm in you know, let's do it.
If you're not giving up on me, I'm absolutely in for the journey," Mizer said.
Mizer ultimately beat her cancer but others haven't been as lucky.
"Unfortunately for ovarian cancer, many of our patients do die of their disease," said Dr. Elizabeth Swisher, who heads the Division of Gynecologic Oncology at UW Medicine and serves as medical director at the Breast and Ovarian Cancer Prevention Program at Fred Hutch Cancer Center.
Swisher said ovarian cancer is the fifth-leading killer of women by cancer in the U.S.
"It's not the silent killer that we previously used to call it.
It's just that people's symptoms are ignored, either by the individual themselves or by their physicians," Swisher said.
The typical symptoms can include bloating, getting full fast after eating, pelvic pain, and frequent urination.
Currently, screening is limited to a CA-125 blood test or a transvaginal ultrasound.
Still, even ultrasound can be limiting in scope, notably since some ovarian cancers are first detected in the fallopian tubes, according to Swisher.
"If we're ultrasounding the ovary, but the cancer arose in the fallopian tube, then we've already missed the boat," Swisher said.
Genetic testing can also detect the BRCA 1 or 2 gene mutation, which can be markers for ovarian and breast cancers.
Swisher said only about 20 percent of ovarian cancer is hereditary so knowing the symptoms, is key.
Drea Mizer agrees.
"Ultimately just really knowing your body and knowing what normal feels like.
As soon as something is not normal for you, if it's persistent, if it's progressive for a few days, really be your own advocate and get it checked out," Mizer said.
The Rivkin Center, a research and educational nonprofit focused on ovarian and breast cancer, is holding its SummeRun & Walk to raise funding for ovarian cancer research on July 16.
The center, started by retired Seattle oncologist Dr. Saul Rivkin, is celebrating its 30th anniversary.
The nonprofit organization has invested almost $16 million in ovarian cancer research worldwide.
The 5k run and walk is happening Sunday, July 16, at Seward Park in Seattle.
The run and walk begin at 9 a.m. and check-in starts at 7 a.m.
For more information, visit rivkin.org/events/rivkin-summerun-walk.
The CDC recently added four new COVID-19 symptoms — fatigue, diarrhea, congestion or runny nose, and nausea or vomiting — to its official list.
Fever and cough are the most common symptoms of COVID-19.
Shortness of breath, which is also common, is often the most dangerous.
Smaller groups of patients report additional symptoms like muscle pain, sore throat, and loss of taste or smell.
Visit Business Insider's homepage for more stories.
Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily.
Read preview Thanks for signing up!
Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go.
download the app Email address Sign up By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy .
You can opt-out at any time.
Advertisement
When the novel coronavirus was first identified in China, patients seemed to develop at least one of three symptoms: fever, a dry cough, and shortness of breath.
The data was skewed, however, by the fact that most patients being tested for the virus had severe cases that required hospitalization.
As the virus grew to pandemic proportions, doctors have observed many additional symptoms.
Some patients report muscle aches, while others develop purple, swollen toes that appear frostbitten.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been updating its official list of COVID-19 symptoms since the pandemic began, adding more as research grows more robust.
Most recently, the agency added fatigue, diarrhea, congestion or runny nose, and nausea or vomiting to the list.
This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers.
Become an Insider and start reading now.
Have an account?
Log in .
Pseudonyms have been given to several interviewees who requested anonymity due to fear of retribution for underage drinking and concerns of legal consequences.
Rachel had her fair share of doubts about whether she should attend the ‘BeRealxStanford’ party in late April.
First, it was the Fizz posts about the bouncers at the venue, Temple Nightclub San Francisco, being racist and sexist.
Then, it was the sudden cancellation of the free transportation to the venue and back.
But she was going to be in San Francisco for another event on Saturday anyway, so she decided to attend despite her reservations.
What followed that night was a sparse event filled with hostile confrontations and marked by an abrupt ending.
The BeRealxStanford party, which took place on April 30, started as a collaboration between the social media app BeReal and Stanford Greek organizations.
The party’s organizers, which consisted of members of the BeReal college ambassadors program and other members of the app’s team, gave each Greek organization a quota of students who needed to register for the app in order for the party to happen.
To attend the party, students had to join the BeReal app, invite two friends and then pick up wristbands from Stanford’s BeReal ambassadors.
Transportation to the event would be free and there would be no entry fee.
Hundreds of students, in and outside of Greek life, signed up to attend the event.
The event, which took place over Admit Weekend, was seen by many as an enticing alternative for students seeking weekend nightlife, given the restrictions on on-campus alcohol consumption during that weekend.
Nearly two years into the pandemic, Stanford students have noted a decline in social life on campus.
Administrators, disheartened by how the pandemic has limited social life, are taking action to improve the quality of life for Stanford students outside of academics, most notably with the creation of a Social Life Accelerator Task Force — an Office of Student Engagement (OSE) initiative to revitalize social life on campus.
As Rachel arrived at Temple Nightclub that evening, “immediately the vibes were really off,” she said.
Her friends, who were planning on coming, had decided against attending the party following the transportation hiccup.
Rachel felt apprehensive about being there alone, but the bulk of her concern was about entering the venue.
Rachel owned a fake ID and brought it to stay past the 10 p.m. cutoff for attendees below 21.
The bouncer almost immediately confiscated her ID, but what surprised her was that he still proceeded to let her in without asking whether she was 18 years old.
Alarm bells went off in Rachel’s head; it seemed as though he did not really care about her age, but might have been indiscriminately taking IDs.
She expressed frustration with the organizers’ decision to book the event at the venue, which Rachel said has received online criticism for indiscriminately taking IDs, discriminating against club-goers on the basis of race and harassing women.
“It seems like they booked the club and then had no accountability for anything that was going on,” Rachel said.
Elaine, a student who works for BeReal and helped book the venue for the event, said the team had no prior knowledge about the club’s negative reviews online.
They picked the venue primarily based on availability and Temple’s willingness to host an 18+ party, she said.
Melissa, a BeReal student ambassador who helped organize the party, said that the club is well-known amongst Stanford students, adding that several Greek organizations have previously held formals there.
As organizers of the event, Elaine and Melissa spent most of the night inside the club, oblivious to reported hostile interactions and ID troubles with the bouncers.
Elaine said that the confiscation of IDs was not BeReal’s fault or responsibility.
“That’s just the club policy,” she said.
She explained that the bouncers were presumably fed up with the sheer number of college students trying to enter the club with fake IDs.
As for the party’s abrupt ending, Melissa emphasized that the ending time of the party was transparently communicated.
“We made it very clear before that the cutoff was 10 p.m. for 18+, and they would have to escort anyone who was 18
+ at that time,” she said.
The transportation cancellation was a result of both a last-minute double-booking issue and the fact that not enough students had signed up for the BeReal app.
The party would have been entirely canceled if the quota of students who had to join BeReal was not reached.
Rachel said she felt that the party’s model led to many of the issues that followed: “No one was paying so there wasn’t an accountability mechanism in terms of finances,” she said.
“People just signed up for the app and then once everyone signed up, the organizers didn’t feel like they had any accountability towards us, towards our safety, towards us getting to this party.”
Melissa emphasized that BeReal was sincere in planning the party and apologized on behalf of their team for “any unexpected issues facing the event.”
Concerns About Campus Social Life
To multiple students, the most pressing problem is not the specific party mishaps.
Rather, they said that the increased frequency of off-campus parties with less accountability is a symptom of the University’s recently-imposed restrictions on social gatherings, which they said have pushed people to look for social life outside of Stanford.
“I’ve heard from multiple younger girls that they’re now using fake IDs in Palo Alto, or even in San Francisco, trying to get into clubs,” said Julia Wortman ’23.
“They’re getting drunk on the Caltrain and having to find ways home.”
Students have specifically pointed to the University’s new alcohol policy, which has been criticized for removing the previous open-door rule, an unspoken policy that allowed underage students to consume alcohol in their dorms as long as their doors were open to Resident Assistants.
“All these 18, 19, 20-year-olds are figuring out for the first time how to drink and how their bodies react to alcohol, without support,” Wortman said, adding that mandatory reporting policies endanger underage students.
Some have also criticized restrictions on Greek organizations, many of which are currently on social probation — while on probation, these organizations cannot host on-campus parties.
According to Wortman, the University’s COVID-19 tracing policies have led to wristband requirements for entrance to the few parties that have been authorized to take place on campus.
“There used to be one or two all-campuses without fail every Friday and Saturday night, and now there are none,” she said.
University spokesperson Pat Harris wrote in a statement to The Daily that wristbands have been “a common practice for many years at Stanford,” and that due to “a temporary gathering policy enacted in response to the pandemic, some events did require lists of participants to be collected for contact tracing purposes.”
As more and more people reportedly leave campus to find a fulfilling social life, students have raised concerns about the safety of larger cities in comparison to gatherings hosted at Stanford.
“Parties on campus provide a pretty safe space for people that want to be in social settings, but maybe aren’t ready to be in San Francisco, for example,” said Emily, another student who attended the BeReal party.
“You’re going to be around so many people that you have no idea, you know, who they are, where they’re from, what their intentions are.”
The University did not comment on the students’ criticisms.
On July 24, 2020, this report was posted online as an MMWR Early Release.
In a multistate telephone survey of symptomatic adults who had a positive outpatient test result for SARS-CoV-2 infection, 35% had not returned to their usual state of health when interviewed 2–3 weeks after testing.
Among persons aged 18–34 years with no chronic medical conditions, one in five had not returned to their usual state of health.
Close
Prolonged symptom duration and disability are common in adults hospitalized with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Characterizing return to baseline health among outpatients with milder COVID-19 illness is important for understanding the full spectrum of COVID-19–associated illness and tailoring public health messaging, interventions, and policy.
During April 15–June 25, 2020, telephone interviews were conducted with a random sample of adults aged ≥18 years who had a first positive reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, at an outpatient visit at one of 14 U.S. academic health care systems in 13 states.
Interviews were conducted 14–21 days after the test date.
Respondents were asked about demographic characteristics, baseline chronic medical conditions, symptoms present at the time of testing, whether those symptoms had resolved by the interview date, and whether they had returned to their usual state of health at the time of interview.
Among 292 respondents, 94% (274) reported experiencing one or more symptoms at the time of testing; 35% of these symptomatic respondents reported not having returned to their usual state of health by the date of the interview (median = 16 days from testing date), including 26% among those aged 18–34 years, 32% among those aged 35–49 years, and 47% among those aged ≥50 years.
Among respondents reporting cough, fatigue, or shortness of breath at the time of testing, 43%, 35%, and 29%, respectively, continued to experience these symptoms at the time of the interview.
These findings indicate that COVID-19 can result in prolonged illness even among persons with milder outpatient illness, including young adults.
Effective public health messaging targeting these groups is warranted.
Preventative measures, including social distancing, frequent handwashing, and the consistent and correct use of face coverings in public, should be strongly encouraged to slow the spread of SARS-CoV-2.
Prolonged illness is well described in adults with severe COVID-19 requiring hospitalization, especially among older adults (1,2).
Recently, the number of SARS-CoV-2 infections in persons first evaluated as outpatients have increased, including cases among younger adults (3).
A better understanding of convalescence and symptom duration among outpatients with COVID-19 can help direct care, inform interventions to reduce transmission, and tailor public health messaging.
The Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness in the Critically Ill (IVY) Network, a collaboration of U.S. health care systems, is conducting epidemiologic studies on COVID-19 in both inpatient and outpatient settings (4,5).
Fourteen predominantly urban academic health systems in 13 states each submitted a list of adults with positive SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR test results obtained during March 31–June 4, 2020, to Vanderbilt University Medical Center.
Site-specific random sampling was then performed on a subset of these patients who were tested as outpatients and included patients tested in the emergency department (ED) who were not admitted to the hospital at the testing encounter and those tested in other outpatient clinics.
At 14–21 days from the test date, CDC personnel interviewed the randomly sampled patients or their proxies by telephone to obtain self-reported baseline demographic, socioeconomic, and underlying health information, including the presence of chronic medical conditions.
Call attempts were made for up to seven consecutive days, and interviews were conducted in several languages (4).
Respondents were asked to report the number of days they felt unwell before the test date, COVID-19–related symptoms experienced at the time of testing (6), whether symptoms had resolved by the date of the interview, and whether the patient had returned to their usual state of health.
For this data analysis, respondents were excluded if they did not complete the interview, if a proxy (e.g., family member) completed the interview (because of their incomplete knowledge of symptoms), if they reported a previous positive SARS-CoV-2 test (because the reference date for symptoms questions was unclear), or (because this analysis focused on symptomatic persons) if they did not answer symptoms questions or denied all symptoms at testing.
Descriptive statistics were used to compare characteristics among respondents who reported returning and not returning to their usual state of health by the date of the interview.
Generalized estimating equation regression models with exchangeable correlation structure accounting for clustering by site were fitted to evaluate the association between baseline characteristics and return to usual health, adjusting for potential a priori-selected confounders.
Resolution and duration of individual symptoms were also assessed.
Statistical analyses were conducted using Stata software (version 16; StataCorp).
At least one telephone call was attempted for 582 patients (including 175
[30%] who were tested in an ED and 407
[70%] in non-ED settings), with 325 (56%) interviews completed (89 [27%]
ED
and 236
[73%] non-ED).
Among 257 nonrespondents, 178 could not be reached, 37 requested a callback but could not be reached on further call attempts, 28 refused the interview, and 14 had a language barrier.
Among the 325 completed interviews, 31 were excluded: nine (3%) because a proxy was interviewed, 17 (5%) because a previous positive SARS-CoV-2 test was reported, and five (2%) who did not answer the symptoms questions.
Two additional respondents were called prematurely at 7 days and were also excluded.
*
Among the 292 remaining patient respondents, 274 (94%) reported one or more symptoms at testing and were included in this data analysis.
Following outpatient testing, 7% (19 of 262 with available data) reported later being hospitalized, a median of 3.5 days after the test date.
The median age of symptomatic respondents was 42.5 years (interquartile range [IQR] = 31–54 years), 142 (52%) were female, 98 (36%) were Hispanic, 96 (35%) were non-Hispanic white, 48 (18%) were non-Hispanic black, and 32 (12%) were other non-Hispanic race.
Overall, 141 of 264 (53%) with available data reported one or more chronic medical conditions.
The median interval from test to interview date was 16 days (IQR = 14–19 days); the median number of days respondents reported feeling unwell before being tested for SARS-CoV-2 was 3 (IQR = 2–7 days).
The prostate is a part of the male reproductive system – which includes the penis, prostate, seminal vesicles, and testicles.
Prostate cancer is a disease in which cells in the prostate grow out of control.
Getting regular check ups can help in early detection of cancer.
Doug Bliss, 74, shared his unusual symptom of prostate cancer, identifying which could help him seek the right treatment in time.
The bus driver from East Anglia, England was out walking his dog.
“Whilst walking, I thought to myself, I need to go to the toilet, but then I just couldn’t hold myself.
It was strange to me as I’ve been fairly fit my whole life, and I’ve never had to go to the hospital before,” Express UK quoted Doug.
He contacted his doctor the next morning and explained his symptoms.
He was then referred to the urology department at the local hospital.
Bowel cancer is one of the most common types of cancer diagnosed in the UK.
Like all forms of cancer, the prognosis significantly improves the earlier it's detected.
That makes symptom awareness front and centre.
A study published in the journal BMC Primary Care sought to determine which symptoms provide the most accurate predictor of bowel cancer.
The 'first sign' of high cholesterol hits your legs, warns doctor
For the study, 511 cases of cancer were recorded prospectively among 61,802 patients 16 years and older in Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Netherlands, Belgium and Scotland.
Bowel cancer, also known as colorectal cancer, is one of the main types of cancer associated with abdominal symptoms; hence, an in-depth subgroup analysis of the 94 colorectal cancers was carried out in order to study variation in symptom presentation among cancers in different anatomical locations.
Data was collected via a standardised form containing closed questions about symptoms recorded during the consultation.
Follow-up data were provided by the GP after diagnosis, based on medical record data made after the consultation.
READ MORE: 'Unbearable': Asthenia named most common sign of terminal cancer - seen in 57% of cases
People with borderline personality disorder (BPD) commonly experience relationships that are chaotic, intense, and conflict-laden.
This can be especially true for romantic relationships.
If you are considering starting a relationship with someone who has BPD or are in one now, it's important to educate yourself about the disorder and what to expect.
Likewise, if you have been diagnosed with BPD, it can be helpful to think about how your symptoms have affected your dating life and romantic relationships.
What Is Borderline Personality Disorder?
BPD is a mental disorder in which someone experiences unstable moods and emotions, issues with their self-image, impulsive behavior, and difficulties in their relationships.
Symptoms of BPD also may include risk-taking behavior as well as self-harm or suicidal behaviors.
BPD is recognized as a personality disorder in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), the resource mental health professionals refer to when making a diagnosis.
According to the DSM-5, BPD is diagnosed mostly in females.
And while it's not known exactly what causes the disorder, genetics and environment are risk factors.
If you or your partner are having suicidal thoughts, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 988 for support and assistance from a trained counselor.
If you or a loved one are in immediate danger, call 911.
For more mental health resources, see our National Helpline Database.
Symptoms of BPD in a Relationship
In the DSM-5, symptoms of BPD include intense, unstable, and conflicted personal relationships.
Research has confirmed that people with BPD tend to have very stormy romantic relationships characterized by a great deal of turmoil and dysfunction.
For example, one study demonstrated that women with BPD symptoms reported greater chronic relationship stress and more frequent conflicts.
Also, the more severe a person’s BPD symptoms are, the less relationship satisfaction their partner reports.
A characteristic of borderline personality disorder is having trouble maintaining relationships, and research has also shown that BPD symptoms are associated with a greater number of romantic relationships over time.
Below we take a look at how BPD symptoms can affect relationships.
Instability
People with BPD are often terrified that others will leave them.
However, they can also shift suddenly to feeling smothered and fearful of intimacy, which leads them to withdraw from relationships.
The result is a constant back-and-forth between demands for love or attention and sudden withdrawal or isolation.
Fear of Abandonment
Another BPD symptom that particularly impacts relationships is a deep fear of abandonment.
This can lead those with BPD to be constantly watching for signs that someone may leave them and to interpret even a minor event as a sign that abandonment is imminent.
These emotions may result in frantic efforts to avoid abandonment, such as pleading, public scenes, and even physically preventing the other person from leaving.
Lying
Another common complaint of people in relationships with someone with BPD is lying.
While lying and deception are not behaviors included in the formal diagnostic criteria for BPD, many loved ones report that lying is one of their biggest concerns; this may be because BPD causes people to see things very differently than others.
Impulsive Sexuality
Impulsive sexuality is another classic symptom of BPD, and many people with BPD struggle with issues of sexuality.
Also, a large percentage of people with BPD experienced childhood sexual abuse, which can make sex very complicated.
A 2011 review published in the Innovations in Clinical Neuroscience looked at how those with BPD differed from those without when it came to sexual behavior.
The authors conclude that those with BPD seemed to exhibit impulsivity through various behaviors, including earlier sexual encounters, more casual sexual experiences, and more partners, for example.
Finally, research has also shown BPD symptoms are associated with a higher incidence of unplanned pregnancies in women.
Symptoms With Indirect Effect
Other symptoms of BPD, including impulsivity, self-harm, and dissociative symptoms, can have an indirect impact on relationships.
For example, if a loved one with BPD is engaging in impulsive behaviors like going on spending sprees, it can cause major stress within the family.
In addition, suicidal gestures can be scary for romantic partners and can introduce lots of stress into the relationship.
Starting a Romantic Relationship
Despite the intense and disruptive symptoms people with BPD and their loved ones must cope with, people with BPD often have many positive qualities that can make them great romantic partners some of the time.
Furthermore, many people who have been in a romantic relationship with someone with BPD describe their partner as fun, exciting, and passionate.
Many people are initially drawn to people with BPD precisely because they have intense emotions and a strong desire for intimacy.
Will the Relationship Last?
Most relationships go through a honeymoon period.
Relationships with people who have BPD are no exception.
In fact, the experience may be magnified.
People with BPD often report that at the beginning of a new romantic relationship, they put their new partner "on a pedestal."
They may feel as though they have found their perfect match—a soulmate who will rescue them from their emotional pain.
This kind of thinking is called idealization.
This honeymoon period can be very exciting for the new partner, too.
After all, it's really nice to have someone feel so strongly about you and to feel needed.
Problems start to arise, however, when reality sets in.
When a person with BPD realizes that their new partner is not faultless, that image of the perfect, idealized soulmate can come crashing down.
Because people with BPD struggle with dichotomous thinking, or seeing things only in black and white, they can have trouble recognizing the fact that most people make mistakes even when they mean well.
As a result, people with BPD may quickly go from idealization to devaluation—or thinking that their partner is a horrible person.
The key to maintaining a relationship with someone with BPD is to find ways to cope with these cycles and to encourage your partner to get professional help to cope with the disruptive symptoms and reduce problematic thinking.
In addition to individual therapy, couples therapy can be helpful for both partners in the relationship.
Managing a Romantic Relationship
In addition to couples therapy, there are therapies that have been shown to be effective for a person with BPD, in terms of helping with relationships:
Dialectal behavior therapy (DBT) :
DBT is a form of cognitive behavioral therapy that relates a person's thinking to their behavior.
There are four main skills taught in DBT, one of which is managing interpersonal skills.
: DBT is a form of cognitive behavioral therapy that relates a person's thinking to their behavior.
There are four main skills taught in DBT, one of which is managing interpersonal skills.
Mentalization-based therapy (MBT) :
MBT is a therapy that focuses on helping someone make sense of what is going on in their mind and the minds of others.
: MBT is a therapy that focuses on helping someone make sense of what is going on in their mind and the minds of others.
Medications: There are currently no medications specifically approved to treat BPD, but doctors may prescribe medication to help improve certain symptoms of borderline personality disorder.
Research suggests that some medications can help a person manage their anger, impulsivity, and depression.
On that note, though, it's important to carefully weigh the side effects of a medication with its potential benefit.
Ending a Relationship
Many issues may arise when a relationship in which one partner has BPD ends.
Because people with BPD have an intense fear of abandonment, a breakup can leave them feeling desperate and devastated.
Even if a relationship is unhealthy, a person with BPD can have trouble letting the relationship go.
This is particularly true of long-term partnerships or marriages.
This is why it's a good idea to have a support network for you and partner, especially if a breakup may occur.
This network often includes a mental health professional.
A Word From Verywell
Despite its many challenges, the prognosis for BPD is good.
This means that while most people with BPD do experience residual symptoms even after time and treatment, in the long term, recovery and healthy relationships are possible.
BALTIMORE, Md. — If you keep chickens in your backyard, you might be worried about the highly infectious avian flu that's spreading in the US.
OSHA has a list published of the symptoms that you should look out for:
Sudden death
Lack of energy, appetite and coordination
Purple discoloration and/or swelling of various body parts
Diarrhea
Nasal discharge
Sneezing
Coughing
Reduced egg production and/or soft-shelled or misshapen eggs.
The USDA has some pictures of what these symptoms could look like in your chickens, click here for that page.
If you've already collected the eggs from an infected bird, the Maryland state veterinarian says if they're properly cooked they pose a low risk, however, out of an abundance of caution, the Maryland Department of Agriculture recommends that you don't eat them.
The MDA also warns not to remove eggs from the property if avian flu is suspected or confirmed, so as not to spread the disease further.
The Department has a list of instructions specifically for people who keep poultry in a backyard coop, if you suspect an outbreak.
If you suspect an outbreak in your backyard, you can email md.birdflu@maryland.gov or you can call the USDA's toll free number 1-866-536-7593.
For more information about avian flu and how to protect yourself and you flock, you can visit the USDA's Defend the Flock website.
At first it seemed like a routine call—something the paramedics had dealt with countless times before.
A man in his mid-50s was having a heart attack, and his physician had called for emergency support.
But when the paramedics arrived, the physician pulled them aside and told them something peculiar: the man had no cardiovascular symptoms whatsoever.
The man had come to his doctor’s office because he’d woken early the previous morning sweating and with a sharp pain in his left wrist.
These symptoms had quickly subsided and he’d gone back to sleep.
Later, after going about his day, he’d visited his doctor to report the episode.
The man showed no outward signs of heart trouble; he was breathing and acting normally—asking what “all the fuss was about”—and his heart rate and blood pressure weren’t elevated.
However, when his doctor performed an electrocardiogram—a test that measures the electrical activity of the heart—it showed plainly that the man had experienced a heart attack.
The paramedics repeated the test and came to the same conclusion.
Later, at the hospital, further tests confirmed the attack and revealed a partial blockage of one of the man’s coronary arteries.
Surgeons stented the blocked artery and, after a few days in the hospital, the man returned home.
The man’s experience was documented in a 2017 medical case report in the Irish Journal of Paramedicine, and it illustrates something experts call a “silent heart attack.”
This is a type of attack that doesn’t cause typical or obvious symptoms.
“Crushing chest pain that radiates down the left arm is the classic symptom,” says Dr. Amgad N. Makaryus, a professor of cardiology at the Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell in New York.
“With silent ischemia, which is more common in diabetics, people develop atypical symptoms, or they might not develop symptoms at all.”
By some estimates, roughly 1 in 4 heart attacks is “silent.”
This is likely an undercount because many of these heart attacks go unrecognized and unreported; most are only identified after the fact using an electrocardiogram or other test.
While roughly half of silent heart attacks involve atypical symptoms, the other half are believed not to cause symptoms at all.
And research has found that people with Type 2 diabetes may be up to twice as likely to have a silent heart attack compared to those who don’t have diabetes.
Silent heart attacks are dangerous precisely because they often occur undetected.
Some studies have found that people who have experienced a silent heart attack are at greater risk of death than those who have a heart attack with recognized symptoms.
“Compared to those without a heart attack, those who have had a silent heart attack have a three-fold greater likelihood of dying from heart disease in the future,” says Dr. Nathan Wong, director of the Heart Disease Prevention Program at the University of California, Irvine.
How can those with Type 2 diabetes protect themselves from silent heart attacks?
Here, Wong and others explain everything you need to know—whether you have Type 2 diabetes yourself or are caring for someone with the condition.
Not so silent
The term “silent” heart attack is a bit of a misnomer.
While estimates suggest that half of these attacks cause no symptoms at all, experts say that many, if not most, silent heart attacks likely cause symptoms that people either miss or misconstrue.
“I think if you go back and take a really detailed medical history of people who have had a silent heart attack, most of the time that will reveal symptoms,” Makaryus says.
For example, the middle-aged man with the silent heart attack—the one who wondered what all the fuss was about—had woken up early in the morning with wrist pain and unexplained sweating.
Makaryus says these symptoms—and especially their timing—pointed to a possible heart event.
“Most heart attacks happen early in the morning when cortisol spikes,” he explains.
Cortisol is a hormone that increases activity in the sympathetic nervous system, which includes the heart, and its levels tend to peak first thing in the morning.
“If someone awakes from sleep with symptoms, that’s something we always take very seriously,” he adds.
While the morning hours may be a particularly risky time, silent heart attacks don’t follow any set schedule.
Also, Makaryus says the possible signs and symptoms of a silent heart attack are numerous.
These include mild pain in the chest or left arm, shortness of breath, fatigue, lightheadedness, sweating, pain in the jaw or back, nausea, heartburn, or indigestion.
Pay special attention to symptoms that appear suddenly, he says, or those that represent a change from your baseline.
“If all of a sudden you walk up a flight of stairs and you’re huffing and puffing, that’s much more concerning than symptoms that are long-standing,” he explains.
“I tell patients with diabetes not to minimize their symptoms.
Better to come in.”
If your medical provider suspects that you’ve had a heart attack, they may be able to confirm this using an electrocardiogram (EKG), an echocardiogram, or one of several other diagnostic tools.
Read More: People With Diabetes Are More Vulnerable to Heart Disease.
How to Reduce the Risk
The link between diabetes and silent heart attacks
One of the common complications of Type 2 diabetes is nerve damage, also known as neuropathy.
This nerve damage is caused by elevated blood-sugar levels, and it can cause numbness, tingling, pain, sensitivity, and weakness—most often in the feet or other limbs.
In such cases it’s termed “peripheral neuropathy.”
However, neuropathy can also affect the autonomic nervous system, which controls the body’s heart and internal organs.
“Neuropathy can cause a loss of sensation to different parts of the body—not only the feet and toes, but also potentially to organs such as the heart,” Wong explains.
This is sometimes termed cardiac autonomic dysfunction or “autonomic neuropathy.”
The nerves of the autonomic nervous systems can be severely damaged.
“The result is that people will not necessarily feel chest pain, and this is one way that a silent heart attack is thought to be connected to diabetes,” he says.
It’s worth highlighting that people with Type 2 diabetes who experience peripheral neuropathy don’t necessarily have the type of nerve damage that can hide a heart attack.
“Peripheral neuropathy is much more common than autonomic neuropathy, and there’s not much concordance between the two,” says Dr. Om Ganda, an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and a research investigator at the Harvard-affiliated Joslin Diabetes Center.
“So if you have symptoms of peripheral [neuropathy], that doesn’t mean you must also have autonomic neuropathy.”
While a person may not be able to “feel” autonomic neuropathy, there are ways to detect it that don’t involve formal medical tests.
Orthostatic hypotension—a drop in blood pressure that occurs when a person sits or stands up suddenly—is one indicator, Ganda says.
If you’ve noticed that you feel lightheaded or dizzy after sitting or standing, and especially if this is a new symptom for you, that’s worth mentioning to your care provider.
“Erectile dysfunction can also be a sign of autonomic neuropathy,” he says.
So too is gastroparesis, or abnormally slow stomach-emptying.
This can leave you feeling stuffed even hours after a meal.
It can also cause abdominal pain, heartburn, bloating, or nausea.
Again, if you’ve noticed any of these symptoms crop up suddenly, tell your doctor.
Researchers believe that other factors—such as a higher-than-average pain threshold, or unusually high levels of pain-numbing hormones—may also contribute to silent heart attacks.
But these factors are not specific to people with diabetes.
Read More: The Link Between Type 2 Diabetes and Psychiatric Disorders
How to protect yourself
A lot of time and energy has been poured into the study of screening people with Type 2 diabetes to assess their risk for heart trouble, including silent heart attack.
“Is it better to screen, and can we make a difference if we do?” says Makaryus.
“The conclusion in most of these studies was no, screening does not make a difference.”
He says the reason for this is simple: People with Type 2 diabetes are already at extremely high risk for heart disease and related complications.
In fact, roughly 3 out of 4 diabetes-related deaths are caused by poor blood flow to the heart.
“The conclusion is that if someone has Type 2 diabetes, [their physician] should put them on all the medications and other things you need to do for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease,” Makaryus says.
That almost certainly means taking a statin drug to control levels of fats in the blood.
It also means regular checkups with your care team to make sure your other heart-disease indicators—namely your blood pressure, cholesterol levels, and blood glucose—are under control.
A healthy lifestyle is also an important safeguard.
“Almost every day, you should try to have 30 minutes of exercise,” Makaryus says.
Avoiding tobacco and eating a healthy diet also make a difference.
“The evidence suggests the DASH diet is very good for people with diabetes,” he says.
This diet, which was originally formulated to help people control hypertension—a common complication for those with Type 2 diabetes—involves lower sodium intake and an emphasis on fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat animal products.
Ganda says that adopting healthier habits earlier in life can pay huge dividends down the road.
“In the United States, 96 million people have prediabetes,” he says.
Many of these people don’t know it, and many could avoid progressing to full-blown Type 2 diabetes if they modified their lifestyle, he says.
Also, rates of Type 2 diabetes are rising in young adults and even in children.
“Lack of physical activity is part of that, I think,” he says.
“Young people are moving and exercising less because they spend time behind the phone or the computer screen.”
He emphasizes that some of the variables that give rise to Type 2 diabetes are out of a person’s control.
For example, a person’s genes certainly play a role in predetermining their risk for both Type 2 diabetes and complications like heart disease.
Still, each of us can take steps to mitigate these sorts of risks.
“People born with these genes may express them sooner due to unhealthy lifestyles,” he says.
Perhaps the most important takeaway for those with Type 2 diabetes: Understand that your heart is at risk.
“Diabetes is really a cardiovascular condition,” Wong says.
“Most people with diabetes will eventually die from a heart attack, a stroke, or another complication of cardiovascular disease.”
He says recognizing this and doing something about it—monitoring your blood pressure and other heart-health indicators, living a healthy lifestyle, and keeping an eye out for the subtler symptoms of heart trouble—are essential to protecting yourself from a silent heart attack.
“I think the overarching theme here is that prevention is key,” Wong adds.
Epidemiologists from the Public Health Agency of Canada are heading to New Brunswick to help a leading neurologist with paperwork on a mysterious neurological condition affecting his patients.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is deploying two epidemiologists to New Brunswick in September to support the province's public health team, at the request of New Brunswick's public health authority.
The move follows a letter from a high-profile neurologist warning that a growing number of abnormally young patients are facing a rapid onset of neurological symptoms.
Moncton neurologist Dr. Alier Marrero sent a letter to PHAC and New Brunswick public health in January, saying he was seeing an increase in the number of patients, and that some patients were in the "advanced stages of clinical deterioration.
"
In a statement, PHAC confirmed its epidemiologists will work under the supervision of New Brunswick public health and conduct a "three-day scoping exercise that will include an on-site review of patient records that have been collected to date.
"
In January, Moncton neurologist Dr. Alier Marrero wrote to top public health officials asking for more testing into possible environmental factors that could be causing severe neurological symptoms in abnormally young people.
(Virginia Smart/CBC)
New Brunswick's Department of Health said that it requested help from PHAC to support Marrero in the scoping exercise related to the timely notification of any undetermined illnesses.
It said the additional resources will be used to help Marrero do his paperwork and that it was not reopening the investigation into a mystery neurological illness.
"Dr. Marrero has struggled to fulfil his legally required notification duties under the Public Health Act, and as a result, the department is deploying resources to support him," said department spokesperson Sean Hatchard.
Marrero did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Letters obtained by CBC News via access to information show terse exchanges between Marrero and New Brunswick's Chief Medical Officer of Health Jennifer Russell.
"The Public Health Act lays out the responsibility of a health-care professional to report the occurrence of a disease, infection or condition that the health-care professional reasonably believes could be a risk to the health of the population," Russell in a letter dated May 5.
"The information provided in your letters does not meet this requirement.
"
Marrero denied the allegation that he has not been reporting to provincial public health officials in accordance with legislative and regulatory requirements.
"I find it regrettable that ... not only do you express no concern for the health of patients and the New Brunswick population, but you do not even acknowledge the patients in your letter," Marrero wrote.
Province closed investigation in 2022
Federal scientists have not been involved in the probe into mystery neurological symptoms since the investigation into a cluster of 48 patients experiencing neurological symptoms was closed in 2022 — a move The Guardian reported perplexed some federal scientists.
An oversight committee appointed by the provincial government determined there is no mystery brain disease, and that the majority of patients in the cluster were misdiagnosed and ought to have been diagnosed with known diseases.
That activity was conducted, and a final report issued; that cluster was investigated by independent medical professionals and no link was found between the cases.
The oversight committee cast doubt on Marrero's work, saying it "could not conclude that the main referring neurologist had sought second opinions.
"
Marrero has become a fierce advocate for patients.
In his January 2023 letter, he wrote to Canada's top public health official and to Russell warning them the number of cases has grown from 48 to more than 147, claiming that some are as young as 17 years old.
He wrote that some patients are experiencing "very advance evidence of neurodegenerative diseases," including dementia, severe pain syndrome, brain and muscle atrophy and more.
"Some of these patients are, unfortunately, in advanced stages of clinical deterioration and near the end of life," he wrote.
He also warned that some patients' blood work showed elevated levels for compounds found in herbicides such as glyphosate , and said more testing should be done to rule out environmental toxins, including the neurotoxin BMAA, which is produced by blue-green algae.
Families, advocates call for new investigation
Steve Ellis's father, Roger, has been dealing with serious neurological issues, including memory loss and trouble speaking, since 2019.
He and other families are pushing the provincial government to re-open the investigation.
"This is what's going to happen, and we're not going to stop until it does," he said.
He said their support of Dr. Marrero is unwavering "because he's the only one who has not abandoned any of his patients.
"
Nova Scotia resident Steve Ellis, whose father Roger has been suffering from memory loss and trouble speaking since 2019, says his family will not give up until there's further investigation into potential environmental triggers causing neurological symptoms.
(CBC News)
Kat Lanteigne, executive director of the patient advocacy group BloodWatch.org, sent a letter to federal Health Minister Mark Holland requesting that the federal government launch its own investigation.
"We will be holding both governments to account and we will not stop our advocacy work until and independent, scientific-based ethical framework is created," she said.
happened ***PKG**
Advertisement Swans from Charles River Esplanade euthanized after exhibiting avian flu symptoms Share Copy Link Copy
Officials from Boston's Parks & Recreation Department say two swans living along the Charles River Esplanade have been euthanized after exhibiting bird flu symptoms.
The Animal Care & Control Division responded to the Esplanade on Monday after receiving multiple calls about two sick swans.
With the help of Boston firefighters, Animal Control Officer Patti Jones captured the adult swans and took them to the city's animal care facility.
"Unfortunately, the birds were quite ill, exhibiting symptoms consistent with avian influenza and were humanely euthanized," a statement from a Parks & Recreation official said.
Officials said the two swans had five cygnets, and one observer of the swan family said there used to be six cygnets.
"The major trauma started to happen on Friday night, when one of the six baby cygnets actually died near the nest," said Dr. Patricia Arroyo.
Arroyo said the cygnet's death appeared to be a sad accident, and that the rest of the swan family appeared to be healthy and active all weekend.
But on Monday, something dramatically changed.
"Monday morning, I got a call and we came out, and the mom was in real distress," Arroyo said.
Arroyo and other watchers of the Esplanade swans called in wildlife experts and watched through tears and rain, as the mother swan struggled to even lift its head.
"And as that happened, we saw the five remaining baby cygnets swim back to the nest alone.
And then we found the dad in distress, actually in worse condition than the mother," Arroyo said.
The five cygnets were captured and taken to the Cape Wildlife Center in Barnstable, which will test the birds for avian flu and help rehabilitate them.
A severe strain of avian flu has been spreading globally and in recent weeks, has killed hundreds of birds on the Massachusetts island of Martha's Vineyard.
Although Boston officials said the euthanized swans were exhibiting avian flu symptoms, some wonder whether blue-green algae may have been to blame — as the severe heat on Sunday could have caused the toxic cyanobacteria to bloom.
The swans' deaths come nearly 13 months after a mother swan that nested along the Charles River Esplanade died suddenly.
The Boston Animal Control department later said a necropsy performed on that swan did not provide any additional insight into its death.
"It's just sad that something that is bringing us all this joy is turning into heartbreak again," said Manuela Jambrina-Escobar.
People who encounter a bird in distress are encouraged to keep their distance, but to take a picture or video and send it to the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife.
The distress could be related to the avian flu, and officials say it is critically important to try and track the spread of the virus.
Boston officials have not said whether the two swans that were euthanized on Monday will undergo a necropsy to determine if they officially died of avian influenza.
Two years into the pandemic, and nine new symptoms of the Covid infection have emerged in the UK.
According to a BBC report, the UK Health Security Agency’s updated guidance listed the new symptoms that include sore throat, muscle pains and diarrhoea, among others.
The National Health Service (NHS) has warned that the new symptoms “are very similar to symptoms of other illnesses, such as colds and flu”.
ALSO READ | A new human challenge study about Covid-19 reveals insights on how we get sick with the virus
The report stated that the original signs of Covid recognised in the UK were:
Advertisement
– Fever
– New continuous cough
– Loss of sense of smell or taste
It should be noted that while these were recognised globally in the initial days of the pandemic, the World Health Organization (WHO) and other countries like the US have since moved on to use a longer list of signs and symptoms to identify the infection for some time now.
But, there is understood to be a debate in the UK about which symptoms will be recognised for a Covid test.
Now, the list has added the following:
* shortness of breath
* feeling tired or exhausted
* aching body
* headache
* sore throat
* blocked or runny nose
* loss of appetite
* diarrhoea
* feeling sick or being sick
Advertisement
Dr Ravi Shekhar Jha, director and unit head pulmonology, Fortis Escorts Hospital, Faridabad told indianexpress.com that even though the NHS has listed it now, Indian doctors have been observing this for long.
“Sore throat is one of the most common features of any viral infection.
Muscle pain can be associated with fever of any origin.
The severity of pain that has been seen with the Omicron variant, however, was extraordinary.
Such types of aches and pains are not seen in the flu.
This type of pain is commonly seen with dengue and chikungunya.”
The combination of muscle pain, loose stool and sore throat is suggestive of Covid.
(Photo: Getty/Thinkstock) The combination of muscle pain, loose stool and sore throat is suggestive of Covid.
(Photo: Getty/Thinkstock)
He added that severe muscle pain should always point towards something ‘unusual’.
“Diarrhoea is a common symptom with many viral infections.
The combination of muscle pain, loose stool and sore throat is suggestive of Covid,” he said.
Concurring with him, Dr Jayalakshmi TK, consultant, pulmonology at Apollo Hospitals, Navi Mumbai said the new symptoms have been included in view of the different presentation of the new Covid variants, particularly Omicron BA1and BA2.
“The new variants typically cause milder disease and symptoms, like muscle pains, diarrhoea and throat pain, which are flu-like symptoms, and there is no need to be alarmed,” she explained.
“Although a lot about this pandemic is already known, we must remember this is an evolving virus.
While earlier, with the original Wuhan variants and the Delta variant, there was more lung involvement, hypoxia and blood clotting complications, these are seen much less with Omicron, which is the current variant,” she remarked.
Advertisement
📣
For more lifestyle news, follow us on Instagram | Twitter | Facebook and don’t miss out on the latest updates
Beauty Queen Olivia Molly Rogers tested positive for Covid while spending Christmas away with her family - but on top of the usual symptoms, she experienced a strange gastrointestinal side effect
Former Miss Universe experiences rare Covid symptom that makes her feel 'feral'
With Covid spreading around the world and mutating time after time, we're constantly finding ourselves with new variants to contend with.
And while the virus changes, its symptoms appear to change too.
According to the NHS website, the original symptoms of Covid-19 that we need to look out for are a high temperature, a new and continuous cough and a loss of taste or smell.
But people contracting the Omicron variant of the virus are reporting all sorts of different symptoms not included in the list, including a runny/blocked nose, back pain and night sweats.
And for one influencer who tested positive for Covid at Christmas, claims she's suffering from another side-effect.
For more of the news you care about straight to your inbox, sign up for one of our daily newsletters here
Former Miss Universe Australia Olivia Molly Rogers was spending the festive period with her family in the south of Australia when she received her positive result from a lateral flow test.
She experienced all the usual symptoms of a dry cough and a fever, but she took to Instagram to explain a weirder side-effect she seems to be experiencing.
Olivia wrote: “I can’t stop burping.
I googled it
and apparently it’s part of the gastrointestinal symptoms of Covid, not that common though.
Has anyone else had this with Covid?”
She added she's been experiencing itchy eyes on top of all the other symptoms.
After taking a PCR test which confirmed she had Covid, she joked: “Good to know my consistent burping wasn’t just me being a bit feral.”
Medical News Today reports Covid can cause unusual gastrointestinal symptoms in some people.
In fact, a study has shown that 53% of people in hospital with Covid have experienced at least one gastrointestinal issue.
Research has suggested symptoms like diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting and abdominal pain can be caused by Covid.
Less commonly, it can also cause belching, acid reflux and indigestion.
Have you experienced any unusual Covid symptoms?
Email jessica.taylor@reachplc.com
After an 11th-grade Black student in Boston, Massachusetts suffered a stroke in class, a supervising health official argued with his mother over the phone rather than dialing 911, leading to a 45-minute interval between the stroke and the arrival of emergency services.
D’Andre Hicks, a junior at Dr. William W. Henderson Inclusion School in the predominantly Black neighborhood of Dorchester, told the school’s nurse on May 4 that he was experiencing symptoms including dizziness and bodily shaking, Newsweek reported.
Henderson Inclusion School via Google Maps Street View
Alishia Hicks, D’Andre’s mother, told the outlet that she received a phone call from the nurse asking if she was going to come pick up D’Andre, who has autism, after he reported that “he felt dizzy, he was shaking and numb on the left side.”
Per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “sudden numbness or weakness in the face, arm, or leg, especially on one side of the body,” as well as “dizziness” are among the warning signs of a stroke, the outlet reported.
Alishia, who uses a wheelchair after having experienced three strokes in the past decade, told the nurse that a likely explanation for the symptoms was a stroke, something that reportedly runs in the family.
“He looks okay to me.
Are you going to come pick him up?” replied the nurse, per Newsweek.
Alishia recalled telling the nurse she couldn’t drive herself there due to her condition, emphasizing: “Please dial 911, he could be stroking,” to which she alleges the nurse maintained her doubt about the seriousness of the health concern and disputed the need to call 911 in response, reports say.
1/3-BOSTON – 17yr old student, D’Andre Hicks, was nearly KILLED by a school nurse after she REFUSED to call 911 when he was having a stroke!
In a CLEAR case of medical racism, she dismissed his symptoms & called his mother instead of 911!
#DAndreHickshttps://t.co/SVu4aBr8la — ReSista Kay🌊 (@ReSistaKay) May 20, 2022
Hanging up the phone after minutes more of argument, Alishia reportedly called the front desk at the school, after which a staff member put her in touch with the state’s Department of Children and Families (DCF), according to the outlet.
“Now I’m hysterical,” she told Newsweek, adding that she was screaming, “He’s gonna die!
They’re gonna let him die!”
45 minutes or more after D’Andre initially reported the symptoms, 911 dispatchers transported him to Tufts Medical Center, “where doctors confirmed that he suffered an ischemic stroke and removed the blood clot from his brain,” the outlet reported.
Boston Public Schools did not immediately respond to Newsweek‘s request for comment.
Research published last month, conducted by a team of 16 experts who work to understand and dismantle “anti-Black racism in academic medicine,” found that “deeply rooted anti-Black racism” permeates the medical field.
Alishia suspects that the nurse’s dismissive response was because of bias against his skin color.
“I hate to say it was a racial thing, but it really seems as though if my son was a different race they would have treated him right away,” she told Newsweek.
“My son said he felt like they didn’t take him seriously.”
TheGrio is FREE on your TV via Apple TV, Amazon Fire, Roku, and Android TV.
Please download theGrio mobile apps today!
Many people continue to experience various physical and mental health effects after having COVID-19.
This is known as long COVID.
Some of these effects, such as dysautonomia, may be severe and affect heart rate and blood pressure.
Clinical studies indicate a possible link between COVID-19 and problems with the autonomic nervous system (ANS), also known as dysautonomia.
An estimated 66% of people with long COVID in the United States have moderate or severe dysautonomia.
This article will discuss the connection between dysautonomia and COVID-19 and tips for managing dysautonomia symptoms.
Coronavirus data All data and statistics are based on publicly available data at the time of publication.
Some information may be out of date.
Visit our coronavirus hub for the most recent information on COVID-19.
Was this helpful?
How COVID-19 causes dysautonomia It is unclear exactly how COVID-19 causes dysautonomia.
Researchers are uncertain whether it is a direct result of the SARS-CoV-2 virus on the ANS or a post-infection immune response.
However, possible mechanisms may include: Entry of the SARS-CoV-2 virus into the brain stem: This may affect the autonomic nervous centers that regulate breathing and other heart functions.
This may affect the autonomic nervous centers that regulate breathing and other heart functions.
Persistent inflammation and hypoxia, or low oxygen levels:
This may lead to overactivation of the sympathetic nervous system.
This may lead to overactivation of the sympathetic nervous system.
SARS-CoV-2 binding to receptors in endothelial cells: When the virus binds to receptors in endothelial cells that line arteries and veins in the autonomic system, inflammation may occur.
Postural hypotension Postural hypotension involves a fall in blood pressure of more than 20 mm
Hg systolic or more than 10 mm
Hg diastolic, or both, when a person stands or sits upright from a lying position.
Symptoms can occur within a few seconds to a few minutes of standing and may include: lightheadedness
fainting
dizziness
confusion
blurred vision Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a blood circulation disorder.
In people with POTS, a very low volume of blood returns to the heart after standing up from a lying position, causing lightheadedness and fainting.
It also causes a rapid heartbeat within 10 minutes of standing that is relieved by lying down again.
A rapid heartbeat is when the rate is greater than 120 beats per minute.
Additional symptoms can include: fatigue
chest pain
shortness of breath
brain fog POTS is one of the most common syndromes among people with long COVID and dysautonomia, with a 30% prevalence in people who are highly symptomatic.
Symptoms of long COVID dysautonomia Dysautonomia symptoms can be unpredictable.
They can range from mild to severe, be intermittent or constant, and vary from person to person.
This can make dysautonomia challenging to diagnose and manage.
Symptoms can include: brain fog
fatigue
dizziness
fainting
sweating
difficulty breathing
nausea and vomiting
an abnormal heart rate
heart palpitations
visual problems and blurred vision
Managing long COVID dysautonomia There is no cure for long COVID dysautonomia.
However, there are ways to manage symptoms.
People with long COVID symptoms may find it helpful to speak with healthcare professionals to learn more about dysautonomia.
A better understanding of their condition may make it easier for people to manage symptoms.
It is best for people to speak with a doctor before trying new treatments or changing their current treatment plan.
Breathing and relaxation techniques When symptoms occur, people may find it helpful to employ techniques such as: using relaxation apps
doing chair yoga
meditating
performing deep breathing exercises Managing fatigue Because dysautonomia can cause fatigue, it may be helpful to do the following: schedule the day to accommodate symptom flare-ups
keep a regular sleep schedule
avoid overextending or doing too much in one day
pace activities slowly over time Diet changes Making adjustments to diet may also help with symptom management.
These may include: eating several smaller meals instead of two or three large meals
increasing fluids by drinking at least 2 liters of water daily
increasing salt intake to 3–5 grams per day
avoiding alcohol Asking for help from others Dealing with a new diagnosis of dysautonomia may feel overwhelming.
Reaching out to others for support may help.
Joining support groups may allow people to meet others with similar experiences.
Other self-care tips Potential tips for managing symptoms include: elevating the head of the bed when sleeping
maintaining an even temperature
using compression garments, such as support hose and abdominal binders
doing reclined aerobic exercise, such as swimming, rowing, and recumbent biking
Frequently asked questions The following are answers to some questions people commonly ask about COVID-19 and dysautonomia.
Is post-COVID POTS an autoimmune disease?
Researchers speculate that there is an autoimmune connection to post-COVID POTS.
The fact that many people develop POTS after having infections, especially viral infections, indicates that the cause is autoimmune.
This syndrome also frequently occurs in people with autoimmune disorders, such as multiple sclerosis (MS) and celiac disease.
Further studies have found the presence of various antibodies in people with POTS, leading to the conclusion that autoimmunity may play a significant role in post-COVID POTS.
Will dysautonomia go away?
Whether dysautonomia goes away depends on a person’s underlying health and treatment.
Symptoms can be unpredictable and worsen due to stress, illness, or overexertion.
A 2021 study found that symptoms persisted in 85% of participants 6–8 months after COVID-19.
However, other research from 2019 indicated that about half of those with post-COVID dysautonomia recovered within 1–3 years.
Virtual health care was adopted more widely during the Covid-19 pandemic, with many people accessing health-care providers remotely.
However, easy and convenient access to technology means some people may choose to bypass health care and consult Dr. Google directly, with online self-diagnosis.
Here is a common scenario: picture someone sitting at home, when suddenly their head starts pounding, their eyes start to itch and their heart rate rises.
They reach for their phone or laptop to quickly Google what can possibly be wrong.
It’s possible that the search results could offer accurate answers about the cause of the person’s symptoms.
Or the search might erroneously suggest they’re well on their way to an early death.
As a researcher in the virtual care domain, I’m aware that online self-diagnosis has become very common, and that technology has shifted the way health care is delivered.
Paging Dr. Google
Online health information took on a new importance during the pandemic, when using online sources to assess Covid-19 symptoms and self-triage was encouraged.
However, the act of self-diagnosis online is not new.
In 2013, it was reported that more than half of Canadians polled said they used Google search to self-diagnose.
In 2020, 69% of Canadians used the internet to search for health information, and 25 per cent used online sources to track their fitness or health.
Virtual care and online self-diagnosis share some beneficial traits, such as the convenience of not having to schedule an appointment, saving travel time to the doctor’s office and avoiding waiting rooms.
However, the key difference between virtual care and Googling symptoms is that there is no direct communication with a physician when self-diagnosing online.
Some may choose to self-diagnose because they feel it gives them greater control over their health, while others may find it helps them better communicate symptoms to their physician.
Some patients may fear misdiagnosis or medical errors.
Over time, people can get better at diagnosing using the internet.
Online sources can provide information and support for a specific medical condition.
They may also be useful for people with ongoing symptoms who have been unable to get a diagnosis from health-care professionals.
Using the internet to learn more about a condition after being diagnosed by a health-care provider may be useful and may decrease the stress of a diagnosis if the sites consulted are trustworthy.
However, trying to select credible sources and filter out misinformation can be an overwhelming process.
Some information found online has little to no credibility.
A study focusing on the spread of fake news on social media found that false information travelled faster and wider than the truth.
Risks of self-diagnosis
The risks of using online health resources include increased anxiety and fear.
The term cyberchondria can be defined as someone experiencing a high amount of health anxiety from searching symptoms on the internet.
Self-misdiagnosis is also a danger, especially if doing so means not seeking treatment.
For example, if a person confidently self-diagnoses their stomach pains as the stomach flu, they may hesitate to believe their doctor’s diagnosis of appendicitis.
There is also a risk of becoming so certain that one’s self-diagnosis is correct that it is difficult to accept a different diagnosis from a health-care professional.
Misdiagnoses can even be very serious if it results in failure to detect a possible heart attack, stroke, seizure or tumour.
Further risks may include increased stress on both the patient and doctors, ineffectively taking or mixing medications and increased costs for treatments or medicines that may not be necessary.
Social media and mental health
Social media has given people a voice to share personal health-related remedies and stories.
The number of active social media users in Canada has increased by 1.1 million since 2021.
This raises the question of how people may be influenced by what they see online and if it may affect health choices.
In 2018, a Canadian internet use survey examined reports of the negative effects of using social media.
It revealed over 12 per cent of users reported feeling anxious or depressed, frustrated or angry, or envious of the lives of others.
Conversely, social networks have also enabled people with mental health problems to feel unity by sharing experiences and support.
However, this may also have contributed to self-diagnosis (and potentially self-misdiagnosis) of mental health issues, such as anxiety and personality disorders.
This can put people at physical and mental risk if it results in inappropriate treatments.
The reality is that online self-diagnosis cannot be prevented.
But those consulting Dr. Google should be aware of the potential risks, confirm information found online with a health-care provider and ask health-care providers for credible online sources of information about their diagnoses.
Taleen Lara Ashekian is a Health Sciences Researcher & PhD Student at Simon Fraser University.
This article first appeared on The Conversation.
A victim mentality is where you often feel like a victim, even when the evidence says otherwise.
Signs include frequently blaming others and having trouble accepting personal responsibility.
We all have days when we feel like the world is against us.
Maybe you try to connect with others, but they don’t seem to understand the extent of your pain — or when making positive changes, you might self-sabotage or give up quickly.
This is natural from time to time.
But if this sounds like your situation most (or all) of the time, you may be living with feelings of victimhood.
A victim mentality can make it feel like life is unfair.
You may even feel there’s nothing you can do to change your circumstances — but that isn’t true.
There’s always something you can do.
We asked two experts how to cope.
What is a victim mentality?
A victim mentality is when a person feels like a victim across situations, even when the evidence suggests otherwise.
They may feel they have no control over what happens to them.
This outlook can impact many areas of your life — like relationships, work, and health.
Victim mindsets can develop as a coping mechanism for previous traumatic experiences, says Dr. Julie Landry, PsyD, a clinical psychologist in San Antonio, Texas.
It may feel like you have little control or impact over external factors in your life.
She explains that it commonly stems from: experiencing multiple situations where you lack control
ongoing emotional pain that leads to learned helplessness
betrayal by someone closest to you People with alcohol use disorder or substance use disorder may find that a victim mentality keeps them in the spiral of addiction.
They may feel helpless to change their circumstances, asking for support from others while feeling unable to support themselves.
Victim mentality signs A victim mentality can manifest in many ways, says Landry.
It can involve feeling like the world is out to get you or having difficulty taking personal responsibility for what happens in your life.
The signs of a victim mentality include: Behavioral signs often placing blame on external factors or other people when things go wrong
having trouble taking personal responsibility or seeing how you may have contributed to a situation
being overly critical of yourself or other s
s self-sabotage
associating only with people who think like you Mental (cognitive) signs seeing the world as unfair or unsafe
cognitive distortions, like catastrophizing
harmful thinking patterns or pessimism
ruminating over past wrongs and hurts
thoughts of self-harm or suicide Relationship signs difficulty with intimacy and trust
emotional unavailability
limited empathy for others
mistrust of authority figures
keeping score in relationships
trouble accepting constructive criticism Emotional signs anxiety
depression
feeling unseen
guilt or shame
low self-esteem
resentment of others
social isolation A victim mentality can affect your life in many ways, from stopping you from applying yourself at work to disrupting your relationship dynamics.
You might also have trouble maintaining healthy lifestyle habits.
Strategies and tips for coping with a victim mentality If you’re ready to change how you feel, many strategies can support you.
Consider professional support You don’t have to go through this alone.
Therapy can help you process past trauma and increase your emotional intelligence, says Landry.
“It can help you learn to choose to either leave a situation or accept it, and take responsibility for what you can control in life and how you react,” she says.
A therapist may also work with you on goal-setting and developing self-efficacy, so you feel more in charge of your life.
To complement your work in therapy, consider journaling to process emotions and cultivating a gratitude practice, she adds.
Try to practice self-compassion Take a moment to appreciate yourself for everything you’ve been through, says Katie Ziskind, a licensed marriage and family therapist in Niantic, Connecticut.
“Experiencing abuse can lead to shame, guilt, anxiety, depression, and low self-esteem,” she explains.
“It’s really common for victims to think that they are the reason why someone has abused them, so counseling can help you build positive self-talk to remove any self-blame.”
Consider shifting your self-identification Research suggests that, in some cases, it can be difficult to overcome a victim mentality if there are incentives for staying in that role — for example, medical benefits, income, or another form of security.
You may find it helpful to change your language, says Ziskind.
“Instead of calling yourself a victim, you can switch over to calling yourself a survivor of abuse which can be more empowering and help create emotional confidence for future relationships.”
Try to own your story A 2021 study found that women who had experienced sexual violence were able to move from a victim role to a survivor mentality by: securing social support
reclaiming their story
letting go of a set timeline for healing There are many ways to own your story, like writing an article to help other people in a similar situation, volunteering with a nonprofit, and creating art, among other ideas.
How to cope with someone who has a victim mentality It can be frustrating if you know someone who displays signs of a victim mentality, especially if you love them and want to see them stand in their power.
In this case, you may find it helpful to: encourage them to seek professional support
remind them how strong and capable they are
set and maintain healthy boundaries
limit interactions that feel draining
resist the temptation to rescue others
learn about how to prevent codependency
The current study aimed to explore the feelings, attitudes, and experiences of women with vasomotor menopausal symptoms about using physical activity as a treatment for their HF/NS.
This study also aimed to investigate their beliefs about whether physical activity could alter their quality of life, and their thoughts about future implementation of physical activity as a treatment for HF/NS.
Most women believed that participating in physical activity reduced their HF/NS.
Whilst a few women did not feel that participating in physical activity reduced their HF/NS, all participants generally expressed positive views about the role of physical activity as a treatment for their HF/NS.
Participants held the view that participation in physical activity improved their overall health and well-being and were supportive of physical activity being used as treatment for vasomotor menopausal symptoms by healthcare professionals, rather than medication.
Thoughts about physical activity as a treatment for menopausal symptoms
Participants were positive and open about the idea of healthcare professionals recommending, and then using physical activity, as a treatment for managing their menopausal symptoms.
Participants were frustrated that they had tried several commercial natural remedies without impact on their symptoms and felt there were no other treatment options besides MHT.
However, there were strong feelings amongst participants of not wanting to use MHT and they felt resigned that they would have to continue to experience HF/NS.
For these reasons they were willing to try any alternative treatment.
Participants were open to the suggestion of using physical activity because it was considered a natural or non-pharmacological approach and there was ‘nothing to lose by trying it’.
In other words, the potential benefits of participation in physical activity outweighed any possible risks, which were viewed as substantially less than the MHT.
In line with the results from this qualitative study, other studies have found that many women preferred to manage their menopausal symptoms naturally [26,27,28].
The belief held by the women that they had ‘nothing to lose’ is perhaps a consequence of the accepted benefits associated with physical activity [12,13,14] and participation would nevertheless improve their overall health even if it did not reduce the HF/NS.
Other than MHT, women did not refer to any other types of non-hormonal pharmacological treatments, suggesting they believed MHT was the only medication available to them.
Whilst MHT is acknowledged as the first choice of treatment of menopausal symptoms for women with no contraindications [29, 30], other pharmacological treatments have been identified as effective alternatives, for example, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors [29].
This apparent lack of knowledge about other effective treatments for HF/NS highlights the importance for healthcare professionals to ensure their patients have sufficient knowledge about all the possible treatments that may be available.
Experience of physical activity as a treatment for menopausal symptoms
Most of the women interviewed in the physical activity groups felt that implementing physical activity as a treatment, and thereby increasing their physical activity levels, reduced their menopausal symptoms.
Specifically, participants reported that they experienced less and/or lower intensity HF/NS.
Whilst a Cochrane review [11] reported there was insufficient evidence to conclude physical activity was effective in reducing HF/NS, several RCTs [31,32,33,34] have highlighted a reduction in HF/NS consistent with the experiences reported by women in this study.
A small 12-week RCT (n = 75) found the average number of HF decreased by about a third of baseline levels in ten previously sedentary women who participated in physical activity three-times per week
[33].
A larger four-month exercise RCT (n = 164) also reported reduced vasomotor symptoms in women allocated to the walking and yoga groups, but there was no corresponding change in the control group
[31].
Likewise, a six-month RCT (n = 176) where women participated in an aerobic training intervention reported a significantly larger decrease in NS for participants than for the control group as recorded in the participants’ mobile phone diaries [32, 34].
However, other RCTs, including the one on which this qualitative study was embedded, found that physical activity interventions lasting between 3 and 6 months did not result in significant differences between the groups in the frequency of HF/NS at follow-up [15, 35, 36].
Although the RCT in which this qualitative study was embedded found no significant differences, there was evidence of a non-significant reduction of HF/NS frequency when compared to usual care; by 22% for the physical activity-DVD group, and by 13% for the physical activity-social-support group [15] but the trial was powered to detect a higher 50% reduction in HF/NS.
Nevertheless, it does appear from the findings of this qualitative study that at least some women perceived they experienced a meaningful reduction of HF/NS frequency that was less than 50%.
The difference between the observations this study reports regarding physical activity and the impact on HF/NS with the overall findings from the RCT, in which this study was embedded, may have other explanations.
These explanations include the suggested associations between reduced menopausal symptoms, both with improvements in physical fitness
[31, 32, 37] and with improvements of thermoregulatory function [38, 39].
Improved physical fitness was associated with less severe physiological HF symptoms [39], while a greater control of thermoregulatory function coincided with reduced HF frequency and severity [38] in symptomatic postmenopausal women (n = 21) participating in a 16-week aerobic training controlled trial [38, 39].
There were no measurements of physical fitness, physiological symptoms of HF/NS, or thermoregulatory function in the RCT in which this study was embedded.
Hence, it is unknown if changes of these parameters occurred in women recruited to the physical activity interventions of this RCT.
It is possible that by chance the majority of women interviewed from the physical activity intervention groups did experience improvements in these parameters, and hence the associated reductions in menopausal symptoms.
This association between reduced menopausal symptoms and improvements in physical fitness [38] may also explain why some women in this study observed their HF/NS reoccurred when they decreased their physical activity levels.
This reoccurrence of symptoms also occurs on the discontinuation of MHT [40].
In addition to improvements to HF/NS, the women in the intervention groups described improvements in their general symptoms of the menopause such as insomnia, mood, and weight gain after they increased their physical activity levels.
The experiences from participating in physical activity reported by women in this study are consistent with public-health guidance that states regular participation in physical activity has numerous physical, social, and psychological benefits to health
[12, 13, 32, 36].
Other studies have also reported increases in physical activity levels improves sleep quality in both non-menopausal [41] and menopausal women
[35, 36, 42, 43], as well as other general or non-specific symptoms attributed to the menopause, such as weight gain, headache, depressive mood, and nervousness [32, 35, 44,45,46].
Therefore, regardless of whether increasing physical activity levels quantitatively reduces the number and intensity of HF/NS, this study highlights the potential that physical activity interventions could improve women’s perceptions of their HF/NS symptoms and other menopausal symptoms.
Even the perception that bothersome menopausal symptoms have reduced may contribute to overall improvements in symptoms in menopausal women, as expressed by participants in this study.
Perceived changes to health attributed to physical activity
Participants reported that they felt participation in the trial increased their knowledge of the menopause and this was felt by them to be empowering because they learnt more about what was changing inside their body, what to expect as a result of the menopause transition, and consequently how to deal with these changes to their body [47].
It may be that this increased knowledge about the menopause meant that women felt they had contributed to their ability to cope better with their symptoms, a finding that has been reported by other studies [26, 45, 48].
Participants who attended the intervention that included the physical activity support groups commented that these groups contributed to improvements in their ability to cope with their menopausal symptoms.
Other studies have reported that attending similar support groups was beneficial in improving menopausal knowledge, giving women a more positive attitude towards menopause, reducing stress [48,49,50], and reducing hot flushes [51].
By socialising at the support groups with other women experiencing similar menopausal symptoms, participants were able to normalise their symptoms, often resulting in a change of how they perceived the severity of their symptoms.
The findings of this study supports the provision of support for women, to help them follow an active and healthy lifestyle during the menopause transition.
As well as understanding more about the menopause, participants reported that they had learnt more about what moderate and vigorous intensity physical activity ‘felt like’.
Not only did participants not understand the different levels or types of intensities of physical activities such as of walking, they also believed that many menopausal women overestimate the intensity of their physical activity because their bodies feel warmer all the time and they are more prone to sweating.
This potential overestimation of physical activity by menopausal women may have consequences in studies that only subjectively measure intensity of physical activity in participants.
Future research should consider the impact that this discrepancy might have on menopausal women’s experiencing and understanding of different types of physical activities.
Views about implementing physical activity as a treatment for menopausal symptoms
This study found that menopausal women would like healthcare professionals to encourage women to engage in physical activity as a first treatment option for their menopausal symptoms because of the wide range of health benefits that physical activity can provide, before offering medication such as MHT.
Furthermore, participants in the physical activity-DVD intervention group commented that their intervention should be included within the NHS Health Check programme offered to women over the age of 45 years in England.
Participants felt that such a programme should include patient-centred consultations with a healthcare professional that provide emotional support to women approaching menopause, information about healthy behaviours, their changing bodies and subsequent symptoms, and specific advice about how to increase their physical activity levels.
Participants felt the consultations should be accessible, with the option of support groups similar to those offered in this study, and include follow-up appointments to encourage and support long term behavioural changes in physical activity [52].
Educational support groups have been associated with improved menopausal attitude and coping with physical and psychosocial aspects [50], and reduced hot flushes [51].
Furthermore, a 12-week health promotion programme noted that women who received four healthcare support consultations in addition to written information on a range of health topics (that included regular exercise, healthy eating and the menopause), reported larger reductions in menopausal symptoms from baseline than the women who only had access to the written information [53].
To ensure the best practice of using physical activity as a treatment option for menopausal symptoms, it will be important to educate healthcare professionals about the importance of tailored information and support that includes planned follow-up appointments rather than only providing the women generic written information about healthy lifestyle behaviours and the menopause.
It also does need to be highlighted that although MHT is documented as the most effective treatment [30] and there is a lack of conclusive evidence about the effectiveness of physical activity for reducing HF/NS
[11], there is strong evidence for physical activity reducing other menopausal symptoms, for example insomnia, weight loss, depression and cardiovascular disease [32, 35, 36, 42,43,44,45,46].
Strengths and limitations
A strength of this study is that it is the first to directly explore the attitudes and preferences of symptomatic menopausal women about prospective treatments for their menopausal symptoms, with a focus on understanding the role of physical activity.
To enhance credibility of the findings, the interviews took place in natural settings, at a time and place determined by the participant.
The data were iteratively collected allowing us to systematically identify similarities and differences in participants’ responses.
The participants invited to take part in this study were selected based on a range of socio-demographic factors, including menopause status, BMI, ethnicity and socioeconomic status, and without knowledge of the quantitative findings from the trial.
By attempting to select women from a range of sociodemographic backgrounds, the opportunity for wide a range of opinions and perspectives to be conveyed has been created.
Participants from all three trial groups, including those randomised to receive usual care were included in the views expressed here.
This is important because those who received the intervention may express more favourable views that those who did not.
This study also has some limitations that should be considered when interpreting the findings.
Participants were enrolled in a trial that assessed the effectiveness of physical activity as a treatment for HF/NS.
This prior interest in using physical activity as a treatment option may have influenced participants’ responses, such that, for example, the participants may have been more willing to partake in physical activity than the general population.
It therefore may be worthwhile to further explore the topics raised in this study from a wider population of menopausal women.
Dealing with IBS, or think you might be?
You're certainly not alone.
As it stands, IBS affects around 12 million people in the UK.
To add, in the past month, Google searches for 'What is irritable bowel syndrome?' have increased by over 300%.
Here, Dr Hazel Wallace, AKA The Food Medic, talks you through what might be triggering yours – and how to deal.
Being bloated is never fun – especially if it comes along with gripe-y pains and general gut unease.
But irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is super common.
Eleven per cent of the global population deal with the condition, while here in the UK it’s thought that one in 10 people do.
Yet, despite how ubiquitous it is, there is no easy diagnostic test to confirm the problem.
Often, women power on, not really knowing why or where the pain has come from and if they do seek help, they leave the appointment with no real answers.
Keep reading for a no-nonsense guide to IBS symptoms, treatment for IBS and the common causes.
What is IBS?
IBS is a functional disorder affecting the gut.
This means that although there is no abnormality in structure, there is a problem with a function of the gut.
It’s diagnosed by the recurring IBS symptoms: intermittent tummy pain accompanied by diarrhoea, constipation, or alternating episodes of both.
How do you know if you have IBS?
As mentioned, IBS is diagnosed by symptoms, not tests.
The NHS says the main IBS symptoms are:
stomach pain or cramps – usually worse after eating and better after doing a poo bloating – your tummy may feel uncomfortably full and swollen diarrhoea – you may have watery poo and sometimes need to poo suddenly constipation – you may strain when pooing and feel like you cannot empty your bowels fully
If you have one of these, then it’s important to see your GP.
They'll rule out coeliac disease and inflammatory bowel diseases, such as Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis.
The NHS also says that the following are less common symptoms of IBS:
farting (flatulence) passing mucus from your bottom tiredness and a lack of energy feeling sick (nausea) backache problems peeing – like needing to pee often, sudden urges to pee, and feeling like you cannot fully empty your bladder not always being able to control when you poo (incontinence)
Who is most likely to get IBS?
Women are more likely to have IBS, at around 20% of the population, according to research by BUPA, as opposed to the 10% that are thought to have it, overall.
And, although onset starts from any age most people recognise the signs between 20 and 30 years old.
That said, the symptoms of IBS are nonspecific and tend to vary from woman to woman, causing many cases to go undiagnosed.
What does an IBS attack feel like?
Although IBS is not a life-threatening illness, it can negatively impact your daily lifestyle and moods.
Often, symptoms can catch you unaware and will differ from friends with the condition.
You might suffer from occasional IBS flare-ups, or your everyday life might be planned around managing more severe symptoms.
Sadly, living with IBS is a different experience for everyone so you'll need to find what works for you.
What is the test for IBS?
As mentioned, IBS is diagnosed by symptoms not tests.
However, if you start to suffer from abdominal pain, a change in bowel habits, blood in the stool or abnormal bloating, then it’s important to see your GP.
They'll rule out coeliac disease and inflammatory bowel diseases, such as Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis.
What should I do at my GP appointment for IBS?
During your appointment, it's important that you are open and honest about your symptoms of IBS.
Now is not the time to feel awkward – they’ve talked about constipation, gas and bloating before and will do again.
You'll need to talk through what you're experiencing because unless your GP feels there is cause for concern you won’t be booked in for an ultrasound scan, a stool test or colonoscopy.
Which foods trigger IBS attacks?
Your doctor or medical team won’t always be able to pinpoint the root cause of IBS.
Plus, regardless of having a diagnosis, the majority of women will at some point suffer from tummy troubles.
The most common IBS causes are food, medication, travel and stress.
Most IBS sufferers will agree that what they eat affects their IBS symptoms.
So follow their lead and keep a food diary to record the onset of symptoms, duration and intensity level.
Soon you should be able to see a pattern in trigger foods.
You can also try avoiding
alcohol
fizzy drinks
caffeine
spicy food, fatty and fried food
In some cases, a dairy-free diet has been known to help too.
Everyone who suffers should try to eat regularly and avoid large gaps in between meals, along with drinking fluids each day.
Being on top of your diet is really is where you can play a key role in your own diagnosis and IBS management.
Food Diary and Symptom Log:
Light Green Daily Food Intake Journal, Symptom Tracker, 6 Months Undated £6 at Amazon
Why might avoiding these foods and drinks help my IBS?
Sugar, alcohol and sweeteners
Sugar alcohols, such as xylitol and erythritol, are used as a substitute for sugar in low-calorie and diet foods.
But warning, they are really hard to digest and can trigger IBS symptoms.
Fizzy Drinks
The reason soda, or soft drinks, are bubbly is because of a compound called carbonic acid.
It’s a very weak acid and isn’t harmful, but it can lead to a buildup of air in the stomach which leads to bloating, burping and wind.
If you already have underlying digestive problems, like IBS, soft drinks can aggravate and worsen symptoms.
White bread
White bread, white pasta, white rice, and baked goods are made from flour that has had the outer bran and germ layers removed during processing – bad news.
Most of the fibre, vitamins, and minerals are stored in these layers turning the product into a starchy carbohydrate that's lower in nutrients and fibre.
This results in it taking longer to pass through your gut, which can cause constipation.
Caffeine
If you find that your morning coffee is shortly followed by a timely bowel movement, you’re not alone.
Caffeine is a bowel stimulant that causes food to move through the gut at a fast rate, which means less water is absorbed leading to looser stools.
Too much caffeine can lead to diarrhoea and cramping.
Yes, stress can affect your IBS
Stress is a common trigger of IBS symptoms.
This is because our brain and our digestive system are very intimately linked through a network of nerves which line our gut.
These nerves control digestion but are influenced by centres higher up in our brain.
So, if we are feeling anxious or stressed, this often manifests in uncomfortable gut symptoms like cramping, pain, bloating and constipation or diarrhoea.
Even if you don’t have IBS, I’m sure you can relate to this the night before a big event, like an interview or an exam, when you’re running back and forth to the loo with an upset tummy.
What are the key IBS treatments?
There is no cure for IBS but changing your diet and lifestyle for the long term is effective in managing symptoms.
In some cases, medication such as antispasmodic (which relax the gut) or laxatives are used to manage this condition.
Physiological treatments such as mindfulness and meditation have also been proven to be effective.
Eat Yourself Healthy An Easy-to-Digest Guide to Health and Happiness from the Inside Out Now 18% Off £14 at Blackwell's
What is the low FODMAP diet?
If cutting out trigger foods identified via your food diary doesn’t calm your stomach chaos, then the next line of management is the low FODMAP diet.
This is a highly restrictive diet that should only be carried out under the supervision of a trained medical specialist.
You can ask your GP to refer you to a dietitian, or, if you're in a position to do so, you could pay to see one in private practice.
Without digging too deep into the science, FODMAPs are different types of carbohydrates that cannot be easily broken down or absorbed by the digestive system.
Normally, the bacteria in your gut ferment these sugars and use them as an energy source.
In people with digestive problems, the process of fermentation can lead to symptoms of bloating, discomfort and wind.
A low FODMAP diet recognises this and restricts certain food groups.
Therefore it is designed only to be used in the short term, like I said, under the guidance of a registered dietician or nutritionist.
Cut through the noise and get practical, expert advice, home workouts, easy nutrition and more direct to your inbox.
Sign up to the
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most common neurodevelopmental conditions of childhood.
It occurs in 5-9% of the population.
Though people are usually diagnosed when they’re young, ADHD often continues throughout a person’s life.
Symptoms can include inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity, and may change as someone ages.
Treatments include stimulant medications and behavioral therapy.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, as of 2016, more than 6.1 million children have been diagnosed with ADHD at some point in their lives.
Boys are about twice as likely as girls to be diagnosed.
The UC Davis MIND Institute’s Julie Schweitzer, a professor in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and an ADHD expert, shares common symptoms and the latest research being done at the MIND Institute:
What are the most common symptoms of ADHD?
Julie Schweitzer is an ADHD expert.
It’s important to consider both the person’s age and the setting.
Symptoms must be present across settings and cause severe disruption: both at school and home for children, and both at work and home for adults.
Frequently, the challenges of ADHD also affect social relationships.
Symptoms may include:
Inattention
Difficulty paying attention
Easily distracted
Frequent daydreaming
Forgetting or losing things
Difficulty finishing tasks or projects; may do their homework but forget to turn it in
Making careless mistakes
Hyperactivity
Difficulty staying seated
Fidgeting or squirming, tapping their hands
Talking too much
Always in motion, as if driven by a motor
Impulsivity
Difficulty taking turns
Often interrupting others or blurting out answers
Difficulty waiting for things
Symptoms of ADHD may be primarily inattentive, primarily hyperactive or impulsive, or can be a combination of both.
Learn more about ADHD
There are a lot of misconceptions about ADHD and its symptoms.
At the MIND Institute, we are focused on evidence-based research and care.
I was recently a co-author on the World Federation of ADHD Consensus Statement, which reviewed key studies around the world.
More than 80 authors from 27 countries put together over 200 key findings about ADHD that are supported by research.
How are the symptoms of ADHD different in adults versus children?
As the brain develops, symptoms also evolve.
For some people, they largely disappear.
For others, they continue into adulthood.
Common challenges for adults include procrastination, poor time management, feeling restless, low stress tolerance and difficulty completing tasks, like paying their bills.
Adults may also seek out jobs that require high levels of activity or multitasking, like sales.
People with ADHD may also have difficulty regulating their emotions and may be irritable or have a quick temper.
Why do ADHD symptoms fade in some people and not in others?
That’s something we are studying at the MIND Institute.
Our MINT (Mapping Impulsivity’s Neurodevelopmental Trajectory) study has been running for eight years and includes more than 200 participants ages 12-30.
The prefrontal cortex and the cerebellum don’t finish maturing until you’re about 26, so as these parts of the brain mature, there may be changes in brain development and connectivity that may lessen ADHD symptoms.
The MIND Institute’s Julie Schweitzer is a professor in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences.
We are acquiring brain scans over time, tracking measures like students’ grades in school, and asking them, their parents and their teachers to rate their behaviors.
For example, do they wear a bike helmet, eat junk food, or use illegal substances?
It’s about tracking self-control and the way people make decisions.
We also ask them to complete reward response and working memory tasks.
These tap into processes influencing decision-making.
Then we may ask them to make decisions like do they want a dollar now or $10 in a week.
We are following these adolescents and young adults for many years to see if they outgrow some of their symptoms, and if they do, what happens in the brain.
What are your findings so far?
The dopamine connection:
Our research has found that structural connectivity between brain regions related to dopamine, a neurotransmitter involved in reward and affected by stimulant medication, differs between people with ADHD and typically developing people.
We found stronger connections between the reward and emotion regions and weaker ones between the reward and attention regions which may lead to greater impulsivity.
Working memory:
We are also studying working memory, which allows you to retain information on a short-term basis to complete a task.
Some people – but not all - with ADHD have working memory deficits.
In trying to understand why, for this study we took brain scans of participants (both with ADHD and without) while asking them to recall three or four objects in forward or backward order.
We compared the impact of the load, or amount of information, and the complexity of the task.
We found that in tasks with larger amounts of information, or those that were more difficult, certain parts of the brain were less activated in individuals with ADHD.
This may have important implications for interventions, such as working memory training.
ADHD and irritability:
We have also had significant findings related to ADHD and irritability.
In one recent study we examined the role that irritability may play in the course of ADHD symptoms over adolescence.
We examined sex and/or gender differences in ADHD and looked at whether that moderated the link between irritability and future ADHD symptoms.
We found that higher levels of baseline irritability predicted higher hyperactive/impulsive symptoms 18 months later.
This was true only for females.
Another study looking at irritability in ADHD and functional brain connectivity demonstrated stronger connectivity between the reward- and threat-processing brain regions and weaker connectivity between the attention- and emotion-processing regions.
Now that the field is learning that irritability is more frequent in ADHD and associated with the unexpected omission of an expected reward, clinicians should consider treatments that help people with ADHD tolerate disappointment when they do not achieve a goal.
A sample of the tasks that VRAM study participants are asked to do.
What are the treatments to help manage ADHD symptoms?
The best approach often involves both medication – often a stimulant medication – and behavioral therapy or modification.
That could mean academic support at school, coaching to improve goal setting and setting up methods to attain goals and help with time management and organization.
Physical exercise may also be helpful, as well as other approaches that target regulating one’s emotions.
Based on our research and others, clinicians should also assess if irritability is affecting them and needs to be addressed.
The MIND Institute offers parent education workshops, which help families to improve parent-child interactions and create a more structured and predictable home environment, as well as better home-school coordination.
Topics include the use of positive attention, homework strategies and the educational rights and learning styles of children with ADHD.
What research are you doing into possible behavioral therapies?
A VRAM study participant learns how to use the virtual classroom program.
Our VRAM (Virtual Reality Attention Management) study is investigating a non-pharmaceutical method of addressing ADHD and distractibility.
We’re using a virtual reality (VR) classroom to determine whether “exposure therapy” with habituation to common distractors can help kids overcome distractibility.
Participants wear a VR headset and are tested on how they perform attention-demanding tasks in a virtual classroom environment that includes a lot of distractions, such as students talking or teachers walking by.
The idea is to train the brain to stay focused in spite of distractors.
The sessions last for 25 minutes.
Participants are 8-12 years old and are asked to do one session daily.
The goal is to transfer the lessons and training from the virtual classroom to the real classroom.
We’ve recently redesigned the virtual classroom and will be expanding this study in the coming months to hopefully start measuring what the impact is outside of the VR environment.
We have some very exciting preliminary findings about the use of eye-tracking to track attention.
What other ADHD studies do you have planned?
In the next few weeks, we hope to start a project involving a specially designed “smart” fidget ball.
This study is a collaboration between the MIND Institute and researchers at UC Santa Cruz.
Adult participants will perform attention and memory tasks and be shown film clips to evoke an emotional response.
The team will study natural movements, like fidgeting, in addition to giving some participants the “smart” fidget ball to squeeze, click or tap.
We’ll be using machine learning to analyze results and to try to predict what specific type of fidget ball behaviors are effective and recommend them as possible therapies.
Are there positive aspects to an ADHD diagnosis?
Yes!
People with ADHD tend to be energetic, creative, willing to take risks, spontaneous and adaptable.
They are often able to hyperfocus on a task that they’re very interested in or engaged with.
What should a parent do if they suspect their child has ADHD?
The newly redesigned VRAM virtual classroom
Start with a pediatrician or primary care provider, who can refer the child for an assessment if needed.
Clinical psychologists can perform in-depth evaluations and provide behavioral therapies.
Psychiatrists can provide specialized treatment for ADHD, particularly if it occurs with other psychiatric challenges.
There are many options for treatment of symptoms that can dramatically improve quality of life, so I encourage parents who have questions to seek out medical advice.
In addition to the MIND Institute’s ADHD website, Understood.org and Children and Adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity (CHADD) are good resources.
It is not commonly known that the early signs of Parkinson’s disease can pertain to sleep.
The disease is known to change the brain chemistry in a person which could directly impact their sleeping behaviour.
Alternatively, some Parkinson’s disease medications can also alter sleep.
This can show up as vivid dreaming and nightmares, which can make going to bed stressful.
So, it makes sense that some people wish this symptom would go away so they can get a peaceful night of slumber.
READ MORE: Doctor explains reason why you should never pee in the shower
Over two years into the COVID-19 pandemic, many people continue to grapple with worsened mental health associated with social distancing, income loss, and death and illness.
Roughly one-third (32%) of adults in the United States reported symptoms of anxiety and/or depressive disorder in February 2022.
Among these adults, 27% reported having unmet mental health care needs.
In this data note, we explore how the use of mental health care varied across populations reporting poor mental health before the pandemic using data from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) in 2019.
The 2019 NHIS data included detailed questions on symptoms of anxiety and depression.
These questions were not asked on the 2020 survey, so pandemic-era NHIS data will not be available until the 2021 survey is released later this year.
In this analysis, we find that leading up to the pandemic, 8.5 million adults reported moderate to severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depression but did not receive treatment either through therapy or prescription drugs in the past year.
Among adults reporting moderate to severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depression, receipt of mental health treatment was lowest among several demographic groups – including young adults, Black adults, men, and uninsured people.
These data provide a useful baseline for understanding disparities in mental health treatment that were already present before the pandemic, and may have been exacerbated by the public health crisis.
How many adults report symptoms of anxiety/depression and receipt of treatment overall?
Prior to the pandemic, nearly 1 in 4 adults (23% of people ages 18 and above) reported symptoms of anxiety and/or depression (Figure 1).
Fourteen percent of adults reported mild symptoms of anxiety and/or depression while 5% reported moderate symptoms and 4% reported severe symptoms (Figure 1).
In total, 54.9 million adults reported at least mild symptoms, with 9.5 million having severe symptoms.
Anxiety and depression can affect quality of life and often co-occur with physical health problems.
Many adults with mental health conditions do not receive care.
In 2019, 21.6 million adults reported moderate to severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depression.
Among these adults, 8.5 million (39%) were not receiving treatment (Figure 2).
Treatment is defined as receiving counseling and/or taking prescription medication for mental health, depression and/or anxiety in the past year.
Among the 9.5 million adults reporting severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depressive disorder, 3.1 million (32%) were not receiving treatment.
A number of factors may contribute to not receiving mental health care.
Among those reporting symptoms of moderate or severe anxiety and/or depressive disorder, who were not receiving treatment, 23% indicated that they skipped or delayed therapy due to cost.
Other data from 2019 found that among adults with any mental illness in the past year and unmet needs for mental health care, 25% cited not knowing where to obtain care as a reason they did not access services.
Widespread mental health provider shortages coupled with low rates of insurance acceptance may also contribute to treatment barriers.
How does reporting of symptoms of anxiety/depression and receipt of treatment vary by demographic characteristics and insurance coverage?
The share of adults reporting moderate to severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depression varied across some demographic groups and by insurance coverage.
In 2019, more women (11%) than men (7%) reported moderate to severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depression (Figure 3).
A disproportionate share of adults that reported moderate to severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depression were enrolled in Medicaid (19%) and a smaller share are enrolled in an employer plan (6%).
How does receipt of mental health treatment vary by demographic characteristics and insurance coverage?
Leading up to the pandemic, disparities in receipt of mental health care existed across age, racial and ethnic groups, gender, and insurance status.
In 2019, 10% of young adults (ages 18-26) reported moderate to severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depressive disorders, similar to older adults.
More than half (55%) of these young adults reporting moderate or severe symptoms reported not receiving mental health treatment in the past year; this is significantly higher than the share of older adults reporting similar symptoms who were not receiving treatment (38% for ages 27-50; 32% for ages 51-64; and 38% for ages 65 and up) (Figure 4).
Some research suggests that costs and factors associated with transitioning from pediatric to adult health care may be linked to limited mental health treatment among young adults in need of care.
In 2019, nine percent of White, nine percent of Black, and eight percent of Hispanic adults reported moderate or severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depressive disorder.
Despite substantively similar reporting of mental health symptoms across racial and ethnic groups, receipt of treatment varied considerably – compared to White adults (36%), a much larger share of Black adults (53%) with moderate to severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depressive disorder did not receive treatment in the past year (Figure 5).
In contrast, there was no significant difference in receipt of treatment between Hispanic and White adults.
Data were not sufficient to conduct analyses for other racial groups.
Research suggests that structural inequities may contribute to disparities in use of mental health care, including lack of health insurance coverage and financial and logistical barriers to accessing care.
Moreover, lack of a diverse mental health care workforce, the absence of culturally informed treatment options, and stereotypes and discrimination associated with poor mental health may also contribute to limited mental health treatment among Black adults.
Men (7%) were less likely than women (11%) to report moderate to severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depressive disorder prior to the pandemic (Figure 3).
At the same time, men (47%) with moderate to severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depressive disorder were more likely than women (35%) to not receive mental health treatment in the past year (Figure 6).
Some research suggests men may be less likely to seek mental health care.
Men are also more likely to be uninsured and less likely to report a usual source of care.
Uninsured adults with moderate to severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depression (62%) were significantly more likely to not receive mental health care compared to their insured counterparts (36%) in 2019.
Narrow mental health networks in private insurance plans, including nongroup plans may be linked to access issues.
Prior to the pandemic, individuals enrolled in nongroup plans commonly reported delayed or forgone care due to cost.
Many employers have indicated that they have narrower provider networks for mental health services than other health care.
Despite having insurance coverage, insured adults with moderate or severe symptoms of anxiety and/or depression and a usual source of outpatient care (57%) were more likely to not receive mental health treatment than those with a usual source of care (34%) in 2019 (Figure 8).
Individuals with a usual source of care may receive mental health treatment directly or through referrals to specialized mental health treatment within or outside their usual care source.
Having a usual source of care may improve but does not ensure mental health treatment.
Irregular or no mental health screening in outpatient settings, difficulty finding or paying for mental health services, and coverage limitations may contribute to the lack of treatment, even among insured individuals who report a usual source of care.
How have mental health concerns and access to care changed since the pandemic?
An increasing share of people across the U.S. have reported poor mental health since the pandemic began.
Some populations – including young adults and some communities of color – have fared worse during the pandemic.
Higher shares of young adults reported symptoms of anxiety and/or depressive disorder, increased substance use, and thoughts of suicide compared to older adults.
Mental distress and deaths due to drug overdose have also disproportionately increased among some adults of color compared to White adults.
Additionally, Black and Hispanic adults have been more likely to experience negative financial impacts and higher rates of COVID-illness and death compared to White adults.
Barriers to accessing mental health care predate the pandemic, though they may have worsened in recent years, particularly for at-risk groups.
Some steps have been taken to address challenges in accessing mental health care during the pandemic.
Telehealth has played an important role in delivering mental health care during the pandemic.
Restrictions around the use of telehealth and prescribing over telehealth were temporarily eased as were some state laws around provider licensing and practice authority.
In 2021, the American Rescue Plan Act allocated some funds toward behavioral health workforce development and developing mental health mobile crisis support teams.
Additionally, the national suicide hotline number, ‘988’, is set to launch in July 2022.
There have also been some bipartisan efforts in response to the mental health crisis, including proposed mental health packages and a legislative agenda from the Addiction and Mental Health Task force.
Recently, the Biden administration announced its Unity Agenda which proposes improving behavioral health workforce capacity, improving access to care in integrated settings, and expanding insurer coverage requirements.
It is unclear how recent policy measures will impact access to mental health treatment especially among groups who experienced barriers to care even before the pandemic.
This work was supported in part by Well Being Trust.
We value our funders.
KFF maintains full editorial control over all of its policy analysis, polling, and journalism activities.
Data shows one person is admitted to a UK hospital every five minutes due to a heart attack, but 11 early warning signs could possibly save you from getting the serious heart condition
Several early warning signs could possibly save you from getting a heart attack if they are spotted early.
The condition, which can be life-threatening, is when the supply of blood to the heart is suddenly blocked, usually by a blood clot.
A lack of blood to the heart may seriously damage the heart muscle and needs to be treated as quickly as possible.
One person is admitted to a UK hospital every five minutes due to a heart attack, according to data from the British Heart Foundation.
Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of heart attacks.
Between April 2019 and March 2020, over 86,500 people had a heart attack (and were admitted to hospital) across England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Symptoms vary from person to person, but there are no symptoms that women experience more or less often than men.
People should look out for 11 early warning signs of a heart attack that can appear months in advance.
This means tests can be carried out and preventative action can be taken, says the British Heart Foundation.
Leg pain
If you get a gripping, cramping sensation in your calves when you are walking, it might be worth seeing your doctor, says David Newby, Professor of Cardiology at the BHF Centre of Research Excellence, as it can be a marker of PAD (peripheral arterial disease).
It’s most common in smokers and people who have diabetes.
Arm pain
Arm pain can be a sign of a heart attack.
Professor Newby said: “If your pain is going down the arm, especially the left arm, or into the neck that makes it more likely to be heart-related than indigestion.
If it doesn’t go away, or if you know you have heart disease and have used your GTN (glyceryl trinitrate) spray two or three times to no discernible effect, you should be seeking emergency medical advice.”
Call 999 for an ambulance.
Swollen ankles
Professor Newby says: “This shouldn’t be ignored, especially if the ankles get really big, as it can be a marker of heart failure, but it is also very common and has lots of other causes.
It could just as easily be from tablets you are taking – for example, blood pressure medication can lead to swollen ankles.”
If you’re getting swollen ankles, it’s worth making an appointment with your GP.
Stomach pain or indigestion
An indigestion-type pain or a burning sensation in your chest or stomach can be a sign of a heart attack or related heart problem.
Professor David Newby said: “Because the heart, the gullet [the passage between your mouth and stomach] and the stomach are all lying right next to each other, the challenge, for both members of the public and doctors, is that a burning or indigestion-type pain and heart pain can be difficult to disentangle.
"
Feeling sick
The British Heart Foundation says that clearly not every bout of nausea equals a heart attack – but if you’re getting chest pain as well, alarm bells should ring.
Professor Newby said: “If you experience intense chest pain even when you are just sitting around doing nothing and you are also feeling sick, that is the time to call for an ambulance.”
If you’re getting some discomfort, but not intense pain, as well as feeling sick, call NHS 111 for advice.
Night sweats
Working up a sweat when you’ve been to the gym or because it’s a really hot day, is nothing to worry about.
But feeling hot and clammy along with chest pains is a sign that you should call an ambulance.
Jaw or back pain
Professor Newby said: “With heart attacks, it can even happen that the pain is felt in the jaw, or the back.
Again, if it doesn’t go away, call 999 and ask for an ambulance.”
There is some evidence that women’s symptoms are more likely to vary from ‘classic’ chest pain, and that women are less likely to seek medical attention and treatment.
Choking sensation
Professor Newby says: “The word ‘angina’ actually means ‘choking’, and sometimes the tightness or pain can be up in the throat.
People tend to describe a ‘restricting’ or ‘choking’ sensation.”
If the feeling continues, and you haven’t previously been diagnosed with heart problem, you should call NHS 111 – but if you have some of the other signs listed here as well, it might be safer to call an ambulance.
Extreme fatigue
Feeling tired all the time can be a symptom of heart failure, as well as of other conditions.
However if you’re tired and you’ve been working long hours or staying up late, it’s probably not your heart – but if you start experiencing extreme tiredness and your lifestyle hasn’t changed, it’s a good idea to chat to your GP.
Irregular heartbeat
Professor Newby says: “This is a hot topic at the moment, there’s a lot of focus on diagnosing irregular heartbeats.
I did an audit of the heart monitors we give out to people for investigation and from about 700 people, we found only about 20 that had atrial fibrillation [which can increase your risk of stroke].
The vast majority of people just had extra ectopic beats, which are usually harmless.
“I would suggest that a jumped heartbeat is usually benign and nothing to get too concerned by.
Being aware of your own heartbeat is really quite common and in itself nothing to get anxious about.
If your heart is going very fast and jumping around erratically then that’s when you should see your GP.
If you feel like this and then you experience blackouts, call an ambulance.”
Chest pain
This is the classic sign of a heart attack, yet many people don’t realise this could be a medical emergency.
Professor Newby says: “If you have chest pain and you feel extremely unwell, you should dial 999 and get an ambulance as soon as possible.
If it’s a heart attack, it’s usually described as a heaviness, tightness or pressure in the chest; people will often describe it as ‘an elephant sat on my chest’ or ‘it felt like a tight band around my chest,’ that sort of constricting feeling.
“If chest pains occur when you are exerting yourself, but go away when you stop, that would suggest it’s more likely to be angina.
That would still mean you should go and see a doctor, but you don’t have to call 999.”
Chest pains accompanied by feeling extremely unwell, mean it is probably the right time to call 999 and request an ambulance.
Malinda Ann Hill decided to resume treatment for her eating disorder almost as soon as she shifted to working remotely in March 2020.
She knew even before the pandemic that isolation at home would be detrimental to her ongoing recovery from anorexia nervosa.
“I had made a really distinct decision not to work from home, so that sent me into a tailspin,” said Ms. Hill, 49, who lives with her daughter in Wynnewood, Pa., and works as an art therapist and bereavement coordinator for a local hospital.
The community and structure of her workplace were helpful for someone who had struggled with disordered eating since her early teens.
Sudden loneliness, mounting fears about the unfolding pandemic and a new lack of boundaries between work and home all helped tip off a relapse that Ms. Hill said had already been brewing.
“I thought maybe I should get back into treatment now,” she said.
“Because this is going to be bad.
And this is going to set off a lot of other people, too.”
Indeed, some doctors, therapists and dietitians who treat eating disorders, such as anorexia, bulimia and binge eating disorder, are reporting an overwhelming spike in the need for their services, with waiting lists growing at many practices and treatment centers across the country.
The first case of metallic taste was witnessed in the USA last year, with some people describing it as intense.
People described it as having “nickels in your mouth", which remained the same for a few days.
But this symptom has not yet been included in the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's list of possible side effects after the vaccination.
Witnessing metallic taste after vaccination is not only limited to coronavirus.
It is one of the common vaccination side-effects and can be experienced after taking vaccination for any disease, COVID is just one of them.
Can your tongue be a new indicator of the virus?
(Picture: REX/Getty)
The three main symptoms of Covid-19 are a high temperature, persistent cough, and breathlessness.
However, the reports from people who have contracted the virus have been wide-ranging, so it seems different bodies could react to it in different ways.
With the loss of taste or smell being a symptom, one theory that has popped up is that having a sore or discoloured tongue could be a symptom of coronavirus.
What is the so-called ‘Covid tongue’, is it a symptom of the virus, and what should you do if you think you have it?
What is Covid tongue?
Professor Tim Spector, an epidemiologist at King’s College London, has reported seeing increasing cases of people with coronavirus suffering with uncomfortable symptoms in their mouth – such as a coated tongue.
According to Spector, one in five infected with the virus will show less common symptoms – like this coated tongue, or ‘Covid tongue’.
Professor Spector (L) is urging people who may have ‘Covid tongue’ to isolate (Picture: REX/Tim Spector)
Covid tongue may look patchy or discoloured, and can feel sore.
Writing on Twitter, Spector, who is the lead scientist on the Zoe Covid Symptom Study UK Infection Survey, said: ‘One in five people with Covid still present with less common symptoms that dont get on the official PHE list – such as skin rashes [sic].
‘Seeing increasing numbers of Covid tongues and strange mouth ulcers.
If you have a strange symptom or even just headache and fatigue stay at home!’
Is a sore tongue a coronavirus symptom?
Professor Spector is urging anyone who experiences lesser known symptoms, like Covid tongue, to isolate, acting as if it is indeed a symptom of the virus.
The NHS still states that the main symptoms of coronavirus are as follows:
A high temperature – you feel hot to the touch on your back or chest
A new and continuous cough – coughing a lot for over an hour, or three or more coughing fits in 24 hours.
If you often have a cough, then this cough could be worse than normal.
A loss of taste or sense of smell – you either can’t taste or smell anything, or things taste or smell different than usual
However, having different symptoms to these is not unusual.
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video Up Next
The World Health Organization (WHO) says that there are less common symptoms too, such as:
Aches and pains
Sore throat
Diarrhoea
Conjunctivitis
Headache
Skin rash or discolouration of fingers or toes
More serious symptoms include shortness of breath, chest pain or pressure, and loss of speech or movement.
What else could a sore or coated tongue mean?
Issues with your tongue could have different causes.
Some of them, the NHS advises, are harmless enough.
This could include Geographical tongue, where the tongue will become patchy as the surface of the tongue naturally replaces itself.
Tongue patches and coating could also be caused by thrush, which can be common in the mouth.
Tongue coating can mean different things.
If concerned, it’s best to call 111 (Picture: Getty)
If you have a sore or white tongue, the NHS advise you can try some simple tips that could help.
These include:
Use a soft toothbrush to brush your teeth
Brush your tongue or use a scraper to help improve a white tongue
Use a straw to drink cool drinks
Take paracetamol or ibuprofen
If you’re concerned about your symptoms, you should call NHS 111 or visit 111.nhs.uk.
MORE : Covid in retreat as R rate drops to 0.6 as lockdown takes effect
MORE : What we know about the ‘concerning’ new Covid strain from Brazil
Follow Metro across our social channels, on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.
Share your views in the comments below.
Appearing on an American chat show, Grant speculated that both him and his wife contracted the virus in February 2020.
But due to the symptoms he first started experiencing, the Golden Globe winning actor didn’t have any idea it was Covid , and started to “panic”.
Although Grant first caught the virus back in 2020, it is still running rampant through the UK to this day.
Due to this, the UK’s independent medicines regulator today became the first in the world to approve the Valneva vaccine, the sixth Covid vaccine to be granted an MHRA authorisation.
Hay fever and eczema may be linked to various psychiatric disorders
Elaborating about what he called a “strange syndrome,” Grant revealed some of the first symptoms he suffered from: “It started when I kept breaking into a terrible sweat.
It was like a poncho of sweat, embarrassing really.
“My eyeballs felt about three sizes too big, and (I had) a feeling as though some enormous man was sitting on my chest.
“I thought, 'I don't know what this is.'
And then I was walking down a street one day, and I thought, 'I can't smell a damn thing’.”
Looking back on Grant's experience retrospectively, it has become clear that loss of smell and taste is a common side effect of Covid.
Other symptoms also appear to be similar to other illnesses such as colds or flu.
READ MORE:
Dwayne Johnson health: 'The Rock' actor was left 'crying constantly' due to depression
A simple urine test for genetic mutations in urine-derived DNA can predict urothelial cancer up to 12 years before patients develop symptoms, an international team of researchers claims.
The test, if validated in further studies, has the potential to serve as a cancer screening tool for individuals at elevated risk for bladder cancer due to genetics, smoking, or from environmental exposures to known carcinogens, and it could help to reduce the frequency of unnecessary cystoscopies, say urologists who were not involved in the research.
The test involved was performed using a next-generation sequencing assay (UroAmp, Convergent Genomics, based in San Francisco, California) that identifies mutations in 60 genes associated with bladder cancer.
New research reported at the European Association of Urology (EAU) Congress described the screening model that focused on 10 key genes covered in the assay.
In training and validation cohorts, the urinary comprehensive genomic profiling (uCGP) test accurately predicted future bladder cancer in 66% of patient urine samples, including some that had been collected more than a decade prior to being tested, reported Florence Le Calvez-Kelm, PhD, MSc, from the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) in Lyon, France.
"Our results provide first evidence from a population-based cohort study of preclinical urothelial cancer detection with urinary comprehensive genomic profiling," she told the meeting.
The results were consistent both in individuals with known risk factors for bladder cancer who were undergoing cystoscopy, and in those with no evidence of disease, she said.
"Research of this nature is very encouraging as it shows that our ability to identify molecular alterations in liquid biopsies such as urine that might indicate cancer is constantly improving," commented Joost Boormans, MD, PhD, a urologist at the Erasmus University Medical Center in Rotterdam, Netherlands, and a member of the EAU Scientific Congress Office.
"While we do need to develop more accurate diagnostics, it's unlikely that we'll have a mass screening program for bladder cancer in the near future," he continued.
"Where a urine test for genetic mutations could show its value is in reducing cystoscopies and scans in bladder cancer patients who are being monitored for recurrence, as well as those referred for blood in their urine.
A simple urine test would be far easier for patients to undergo than invasive procedures or scans, as well as being less costly for health services.
"
Improved Detection
Le Calvez-Kelm and colleagues had previously shown that promoter mutations in the gene encoding for the enzyme telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) identified in urine were "promising noninvasive biomarkers" for early detection of bladder cancer.
They found that TERT mutations in urine could predict which patients were likely to develop urothelial cancer with 48% sensitivity and 100% specificity.
In the study presented at EAU23, they hypothesized that uCGP of DNA in urine could offer enhanced sensitivity for early detection of urothelial cancer.
They first used the 60-gene assay to create a training set using urine samples from 46 patients with de novo urothelial cancer, 40 with recurrent cancer, and 140 healthy controls.
They then tested the model in two validation cohorts.
The first validation cohort consisted of samples from 22 patients with de novo cancer, 48 with recurrent urothelial cancer, and 96 controls from a case-control study conducted at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) in Boston and Ohio State University (OSU) in Columbus.
The second validation cohort included 29 patients from the prospective Golestan Cohort Study who subsequently developed urothelial cancer, with 98 controls.
In all, 10 genes were identified as optimal for inclusion in a screening model, which was trained to an overall sensitivity of 88% and a 97% sensitivity for high-grade tumors, with a specificity of 94%.
In the MGH/OSU validation cohort the sensitivity of the models was 71%, and the specificity was 94%.
In the Golestan cohort, the sensitivity was 66%, with a specificity of 94%.
This compared favorably with the performance of the TERT-only screening model, which, as noted before, had a sensitivity of 48%, albeit with 100% specificity.
"Interestingly, when we broke down the analysis according to the lag time between urine collection and diagnosis, sensitivity increased as the time to diagnosis decreased, so the closer we got to the diagnosis, the higher was the sensitivity," Le Calvez-Kelm said.
When the analysis was limited to urothelial cancers diagnosed within 7 years of sample collection, the sensitivity for detecting preclinical cancer improved to 86%, compared with 57% for a test of TERT promoter mutations alone.
Among the patients in the Golestan cohort, uCGP-predicted positive results were associated with a more than eightfold higher risk for worse cancer-free survival compared with uCGP-predicted negatives (hazard ratio 8.5, P < .0001).
"Of course, further studies are needed to validate this finding and to assess the clinical utility in other longitudinal cohorts," Le Calvez-Kelm concluded.
European Association of Urology Annual Congress (EAU 2023)
Abstract A0268.
Presented March 11, 2023, and online.
Neil Osterweil, an award-winning medical journalist, is a long-standing and frequent contributor to Medscape.
For more news, follow Medscape on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and YouTube.
Though spring rain is great for our ecosystem, it generally does not help those with seasonal allergies -- at least, not for long.
Rumor has it that springtime rain can help alleviate allergy symptoms also associated with the season, but experts say that’s not entirely true.
Light rain can temporarily reduce pollen count, lessening the amount moving through the air and offering a brief respite from allergy symptoms.
Since moisture weighs pollen down, humidity and rain can prevent pollen from traveling, experts say.
On the other hand, heavier rain and storms can actually worsen spring allergy symptoms.
Heavy rain can burst pollen particles, fracturing them into smaller particles that release into the air at a “much higher concentration,” an allergist told The Weather Channel.
Pollen particles can get swept up into the clouds, and then can be broken into smaller particles by wind, humidity, moisture, and even lightning, experts say.
“Then you get these cold, dry outflows that carry the tiny allergens down to the ground, where they can readily enter the nose and lungs,” said Ari Sarsalari, Atlanta meteorologist with The Weather Channel.
When this happens during heavy rain or a thunderstorm, people can experience what is called thunderstorm asthma -- meaning an allergic reaction occurs in the lungs, triggering asthma or allergy symptoms in the upper respiratory tract.
But what about when the rain ends?
Even when the rain stops, the impact it had can contribute to conditions that make matters worse for those with allergies.
Rainfall doesn’t just impact those with tree pollen sensitivities; it can also worsen allergy symptoms for those with other triggers.
Rain can help weeds and grass grow, which can worsen allergies related to weed and grass pollen.
Rain also creates damp conditions that are ideal for mold and mildew growth, affecting those sensitive to such allergens.
And, as you likely guessed, rain helps more plants and trees grow, which in turn produce more pollen.
What weather is good for those with spring allergies?
When the weather quickly fluctuates between periods of rain and dry conditions, allergy symptoms will crop up for many, experts say.
If it is going to rain, which it probably will (it is spring), the best case scenario would be daily rain showers over the course of several days.
Experts say warm temperatures and wind can especially trigger allergy symptoms.
Warm weather leads to more pollen production, and the wind helps spread it around.
Ideal spring weather for allergy sufferers would feature cooler temperatures and little-to-no wind.
Dry conditions can cause trees and plants to grow more slowly, which can reduce the amount of pollen circulating in the air.
But, if it’s dry and windy, whatever pollen is present can be blown around much more easily, triggering allergy symptoms.
Alleviating allergy symptoms
Unfortunately, it seems that weather conditions have to be just right for those with spring allergies to find relief.
And with the ever-fluctuating weather in Metro Detroit, it’s likely that symptoms will be persist for many.
Thankfully, the region has seen cooler temperatures this week, which have helped to keep symptoms at bay.
Tree pollen allergens are the primary issue for Metro Detroiters at this point in the season.
Levels of grass and weed pollen and mold have been low so far.
---> Allergy forecast: Tree pollen triggering symptoms this week in Metro Detroit
Still, if you’re suffering from allergy symptoms, experts encourage people with a known history of allergies to begin their typical medications as early as they can in the season.
(So if you haven’t yet, you may want to consider doing so now!)
People with springtime allergies are also encouraged to resist the urge to open their windows when the weather is nice, and to change their clothes and shower after spending time outside, since pollen falls on you.
Health experts also encourage using fans to circulate air in your home.
If you’re getting recurring sinus infections, if the allergies impact your breathing, or if over the counter medications aren’t offering relief, experts suggest visiting an allergist.
People who are mixing multiple allergy medications should seek expert help to determine the best plan of action, as some allergy medications are not safe if mixed together.
---> Sneezy season: Tips for easing early spring allergies
“I try not to make faces, so that I don't offend people,” says Claudia, a 29-year-old communications specialist from Bucharest.
“I can't tell my boyfriend I feel sick because I can't stand the smell of his deodorant.
I can’t grimace when my roommate enters the room because I smell the perfume she just sprayed.
So I shut up, I try to hold my breath and to get over it.”
Claudia is experiencing one of the effects of long COVID, a raft of ailments caused by coronavirus that can endure long after the illness’ initial symptoms have abated.
The loss of the smell , or anosmia , is a common symptom for people with COVID-19, but according to a small 2020 study , 89 percent of patients recover their smell either completely or partially after about a month.
Claudia falls into the small group who either don’t recover it at all, or who develop parosmia , a condition where your sense of smell becomes distorted
Claudia waited it out, and finally the petrol smell faded away.
But then, in mid-April, things took a turn for the worse.
Instead of petrol, she started smelling a much stronger chemical scent coming from almost any kind of food.
“It’s as if the steak you’re eating smelled of detergent,” she says.
The things that didn’t reek of chemicals started smelling of garbage, mould or sour milk – “something both sweet and disgusting.
I feel like vomiting all the time.”
Eventually, Claudia’s senses recovered, but in March of 2021 she started to detect a petrol-like odour coming from her boyfriend’s clothes.
She’d tell him to change, but the scent wouldn’t go away.
“A few days later, that smell was everywhere,” Claudia says.
“I sensed it no matter what I ate or drank.
I couldn’t eat anything.
Even water tasted like that.”
Claudia recovered from COVID-19 in October of 2020.
She had a relatively mild case, and was only in bed for a few days, but she completely lost her sense of smell and taste for a few weeks.
Scientific studies are underway, but it will still take us a while to fully understand how widespread the phenomenon is and how exactly it works.
Though far from a reliable survey of the numbers affected, some Facebook support groups for people who have anosmia and parosmia as a result of COVID-19 have gathered as many as 27,000 members.
People are also sharing their experiences with these issues on Instagram and TikTok
Some people only perceive certain strong smells as offensive, while for others many smells are horribly distorted.
“Probably these differences depend on how many of their receptors were damaged and how much of their olfactory code was broken,” says Dr Ionescu.
“People who have only a few affected receptors might find some smells unpleasant or weird, but if only a few of your receptors are functional, all the codes will be wrong.”
One of the hypotheses that could explain this phenomenon is that the smell receptors and neurons affected by the virus regenerate at different speeds.
“Some of them might regenerate before others, affecting these scent codes,” says Dr Ionescu.
As a result, scents that would normally activate a certain pattern now lead our brain to interpret the signal as a completely different odour.
Neurologist Mihai Radu Ionescu , from the Neuroaxis Clinic in Bucharest, says we don’t yet know why parosmia affects long COVID patients.
“Our sense of smell relies on more than 300 different smell receptors,” he explains.
“These receptors activate in a certain pattern, a code let’s say, that allows us to recognise a particular scent – like apple cake, for instance.”
“I started smelling weird scents out of the blue and I didn't know why,” she says.
“I couldn't eat or drink anything – everything smelled of mould.
Even I smelled of mould.”
After reading up about it online, she realised it was an aftereffect of COVID-19.
“I didn't go to the doctor, because I didn’t know which doctor to go to.
I really want to fix this, because I can't enjoy anything.
It's the worst, and I have no idea how to deal with it,” she says.
For Sorina, a 19-year-old student in Timisoara, her parosmia also appeared suddenly.
She lost her sense of smell immediately after contracting the virus in September of 2020, and when it returned two months later it was totally off.
Fortunately, three months after recovering from COVID-19, Bianca’s senses came back and were almost normal.
But at some point during those three months, she started detecting an unpleasant odour that nobody else could smell.
Medically, this is known as a phantom smell or phantosmia.
Bianca also now experiences the smell of meat in a distorted way, especially when it’s cooked.
“It’s a questionable odour, like rotten or rancid vegetables,” she says.
Bianca, 21, currently studying in the city of Cluj-Napoca, lost her sense of smell and taste in November of last year.
Back then, she says, she could drink vinegar without flinching.
But because nothing had any flavour, she quickly lost her appetite.
“I still tried to eat, because I had an eating disorder when I was a teenager and I didn't want to go back to that,” she says.
Dr Ionescu says we also don’t know exactly why our brains interpret distorted smells as foul more often than pleasant.
Euosmia – a condition where a person perceives a regular smell as more appealing than it actually is – is far rarer than parosmia.
“I don’t have an exact explanation for this, but it probably has to do with the fact that it's much easier to recognise an unpleasant smell, like rotten, poisonous food, than to recognise a pleasant scent,” he says.
Dr Ionescu says we also don’t know exactly why our brains interpret distorted smells as foul more often than pleasant.
Euosmia – a condition where a person perceives a regular smell as more appealing than it actually is – is far rarer than parosmia.
“I don’t have an exact explanation for this, but it probably has to do with the fact that it's much easier to recognise an unpleasant smell, like rotten, poisonous food, than to recognise a pleasant scent,” he says.
Camelia, 39, also lost her sense of smell when she had COVID-19.
“Fried onions started to smell of garbage and sweat.
Nettles [commonly eaten in Romania], which are my favourite food, started to taste terrible – they made me choke,” she says.
Coca-Cola, bananas, pears – to her, they all taste and smell like garbage.
“My life has been seriously affected,” she says.
“I have to avoid the food court in malls and fast food restaurants on the streets, or else I’ll vomit.
Easter was miserable!
All my neighbours were cooking and I felt like puking the whole time.”
Camelia, 39, also lost her sense of smell when she had COVID-19.
“Fried onions started to smell of garbage and sweat.
Nettles [commonly eaten in Romania], which are my favourite food, started to taste terrible – they made me choke,” she says.
Coca-Cola, bananas, pears – to her, they all taste and smell like garbage.
“My life has been seriously affected,” she says.
“I have to avoid the food court in malls and fast food restaurants on the streets, or else I’ll vomit.
Easter was miserable!
All my neighbours were cooking and I felt like puking the whole time.”
Unfortunately, there aren’t many treatment options for parosmia.
“In principle, the degree of initial impairment is one of the main factors to determine how quickly we’d expect the person to recover,” says Dr Ionescu.
He and his team have tried some drugs available on the market, but the results were poor and the risk of side effects high.
“Basically, there is no treatment other than waiting for your sense of smell to get better,” he says.
Unfortunately, there aren’t many treatment options for parosmia.
“In principle, the degree of initial impairment is one of the main factors to determine how quickly we’d expect the person to recover,” says Dr Ionescu.
He and his team have tried some drugs available on the market, but the results were poor and the risk of side effects high.
“Basically, there is no treatment other than waiting for your sense of smell to get better,” he says.
One of the few options currently used to help during the healing process is One of the few options currently used to help during the healing process is olfactory recovery or smell training .
The basic idea is you should pick a number of strong scents – say four to start with – and smell them for 20 seconds each in the morning and evening daily, really trying to focus on your sensations.
It’s simple and safe, and although it is at present unclear
how effective it is, it can give those affected some hope while they wait.
The good news is that parosmia does get better, at least for some patients.
Cristina, 23, also from Cluj-Napoca, is one of the lucky ones.
For a few months she couldn't touch alcohol, cheese, yoghurt, onion or garlic.
“My father put a lot of effort into cooking for Easter,” she says.
“I didn't have the heart to tell him I couldn’t eat because everything smelled terrible to me.
So I ate his egg salad, even though I thought it tasted disgusting.”
The good news is that parosmia does get better, at least for some patients.
Cristina, 23, also from Cluj-Napoca, is one of the lucky ones.
For a few months she couldn't touch alcohol, cheese, yoghurt, onion or garlic.
“My father put a lot of effort into cooking for Easter,” she says.
“I didn't have the heart to tell him I couldn’t eat because everything smelled terrible to me.
So I ate his egg salad, even though I thought it tasted disgusting.”
When the pandemic began, losing your sense of smell was considered a key indicator of covid-19, and the condition affected about half of those who tested positive for the coronavirus.
However, a new study reveals that the chance of smell loss from the latest omicron variants has dropped dramatically since the early days of the pandemic.
Did you or anyone you know get sick at some point during the spring, but tested negative for COVID — despite having very similar symptoms?
It may have been a much lesser-known virus that surged for months.
Most were unaware of the respiratory virus known as hMPV, or human metapneumovirus, which can feel like a bad case of the common cold.
But at its peak in mid-March, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention saw positive testing for hMPV at around 11% — which was about 36% higher than the pre-COVID average.
"The virus doesn’t cause a severe infection so we don’t always test it everywhere on every patient," said Dr. Marina Keller, an epidemiologist who treats infectious diseases at Westchester Medical Center.
While the virus, which the CDC says was discovered just over 20 years ago, generally doesn't lead to severe illnesses, in rare cases it can lead to pneumonia.
And while the peak season for it is coming to the end, it is another virus to be aware of.
Get Tri-state area news and weather forecasts to your inbox.
Sign up for NBC New York newsletters.
According to Dr. Keller, HMPV symptoms are similar to other respiratory viruses.
Symptoms include:
Runny nose
Sore throat
Fever
Cough
Nasal congestion
Shortness of breath
"For most of the population, it’s like other respiratory viruses, common cold.
But it can be more worrisome for people who have other medical problems," said Dr. Keller.
Those with weaker immune systems are more at risk — younger children and the elderly, especially.
As the urgency regarding COVID fades and many have ditched their facemasks in most settings, it could contribute to more cases springing up.
"It is definitely possible.
As we take our masks off, get a little bit more lax with our common sense precautions for viral infection, that we do see more viruses," Dr. Keller said.
It’s cold and flu season again, which means you could be left wondering which virus is causing your symptoms.
Here’s what you need to know.
Dr. Keller says stay home if you or your kids feel sick.
And, at the very least, there's always one things that helps prevent viruses from spreading.
"Hand washing never goes out of style, prevents all kinds of viruses," she said.
There is no treatment or vaccine for hMPV, though scientists are working on the latter.
Symptoms can be treated with standard over-the-counter medications.
The CDC said the estimated incubation period is three to six days, and how long those infected feel symptomatic can depend on severity, though it is similar to other respiratory illnesses.
How Is hMPV Spread?
Here's how the virus can go from one person to another, according to the CDC:
Particles or droplets from coughing and sneezing
Close personal contact, like shaking hands
Touching objects or surfaces that have the viruses on them then touching the mouth, nose, or eyes
The virus generally starts spreading in winter and lasts through the spring.
Millions of people around the world are believed to suffer from long COVID yet little remains known about the condition – though research has recently proposed several theories for its cause.
Between 10 to 20 percent of people who contract coronavirus are estimated to have long COVID symptoms – most commonly fatigue, breathlessness, and a lack of mental clarity dubbed brain fog – months after recovering from the disease.
The US-based Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) estimates that nearly 145 million people worldwide had at least one of those symptoms in 2020 and 2021.
In Europe alone, 17 million people had a long COVID symptom at least three months after infection during that time, according to IHME modeling for the World Health Organization (WHO) published earlier this month.
These millions "cannot continue to suffer in silence", WHO Europe director Hans Kluge said, calling for the world to act quickly to learn more about the condition.
Researchers have been racing to catch up but the vast array – and inconsistency – of symptoms has complicated matters.
More than 200 different symptoms have been ascribed to long COVID so far, according to a University College London study.
'Fatigue in the background'
"There are no symptoms that are truly specific to long COVID but it does have certain characteristics that fluctuate," said Olivier Robineau, the long COVID coordinator at France's Emerging Infectious Diseases research agency.
"Fatigue remains in the background," he told AFP, while the symptoms "seem to be exacerbated after intellectual or physical effort – and they become less frequent over time".
One thing we do know is that people who had more severe initial cases, including needing to be hospitalized, are more likely to get long COVID, according to the IHME.
Researchers have been pursuing several leads into exactly what could be behind the condition.
A study published in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases in September found that COVID's infamous spike protein – the key that lets the virus into the body's cells – was still present in patients a full year after infection.
This suggests that viral reservoirs may persist in some people, potentially causing inflammation that could lead to long COVID-like symptoms, the researchers said.
If they are right, a test could be developed to identify the spike, potentially leading to one of the great and elusive goals of long COVID research – a clear way to diagnose the condition.
However, their findings have not been confirmed by other research, and several other causes have been proposed.
'Data not very solid yet'
One leading theory is that tissue damage from severe COVID cases triggers lasting disruption to the immune system.
Another suggests that the initial infection causes tiny blood clots, which could be related to long COVID symptoms.
However "for each of these hypotheses, the data is not very solid yet", Robineau said.
It is most likely that "we are not going to find a single cause to explain long COVID", he added.
"The causes may not be exclusive.
They could be linked or even succeed each other in the same individual, or be different in different individuals.
"
A way to treat the condition also remains elusive.
For the last year, the Hotel-Dieu hospital in Paris has been offering long COVID patients a half-day treatment course.
"They meet an infectious disease specialist, a psychiatrist, then a doctor specializing in sports rehabilitation," said Brigitte Ranque, who runs the protocol dubbed CASPER.
"In the team's experience, a majority of the symptoms can be attributed to functional somatic syndromes," she said.
These are a group of chronic disorders such as chronic fatigue and fibromyalgia that have no known cause.
Cognitive behavioral therapy, a psychological approach often used for those syndromes, is used to treat long COVID alongside supervised physical activity, Ranque said.
"The patients are brought back in three months later.
The majority of them are better.
More than half say they are cured," she told AFP.
"But about 15 percent did not improve at all.
"
© Agence France-Presse
Counted among the world's deadliest insects, mosquitoes have the ability to spread various diseases to humans and are responsible for millions of deaths annually.
According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), vector-borne diseases are mainly found in tropical and sub-tropical regions and affect the poorest populations.
Not everyone may fall sick after a bite from an infected mosquito, but in some cases, people develop a mild or long-term illness.
However, several cases of mosquito-borne diseases can lead to death if not treated properly.
advertisement
Types of mosquitoes and the diseases they cause:
Although there are several different types of mosquitoes and they act as vendors for different diseases.
There are three different types of mosquitoes and the diseases they spread are as follows:
-Aedes mosquitoes: Diseases such as Chikungunya, Dengue, rift valley fever, yellow fever, lymphatic filariasis and Zika are caused by Aedes mosquitoes.
They are mainly found in tropical, subtropical, and in temperate climates and prefer to feed on people.
-Anopheles mosquitoes: Anopheles are black or dark brown in colour and can breed in freshwater.
Anopheles mosquitoes are primary transmitters of malaria and can also cause lymphatic filariasis.
-Culex mosquitoes: Culex mosquitoes thrive in warmer temperatures and are carriers of Japanese encephalitis that causes 'acute inflammation' of the brain.
Culex mosquitoes can also cause lymphatic filariasis and West Nile fever and they breed in dirty, stagnant water.
Here are some of the common mosquito-borne diseases and their symptoms:
-Dengue: Considered as one of the deadliest diseases caused by mosquitoes, Dengue is caused by the dengue virus.
Some of the common symptoms of dengue are high fever, headache, vomiting, joint pain and skin rash and they are exhibited after 3 to fourteen days after the infection.
A dengue patient may require a time period of minimum of seven days to recover fully.
However, there is no definite treatment for dengue as of now, but doctors usually recommend acetaminophen.
In severe cases, dengue fever may escalate into dengue hemorrhagic fever with symptoms such as bleeding under the skin and constant vomiting.
Drinking plenty of fluids and staying hydrated can help prevent dengue and if the case is severe, the patient must be admitted to the hospital and seek medical treatment.
-Malaria: Malaria is caused by Plasmodium vivax and is transmitted through female Anopheles mosquitoes and they mostly bite between dusk and dawn.
Anopheles mosquitoes, which breed in rainwater pools, rice fields and pond margins, bite human bodies and transfer the deadly virus into the bloodstream, which affects the liver.
The symptoms of Malaria include chills, sweat, fever and muscle pain and doctors recommend medicines made of quinine for malaria.
The malarial parasites multiply at a fast rate inside the human body and need immediate medical attention.
advertisement
In recent times, there has been a rapid increase in cases of malaria due to urbanisation, industrialisation, construction projects, migration and disposal of goods.
Such factors create favourable conditions for mosquitoes' breeding grounds and contribute to the spread of the disease.
Young children, non-immune pregnant women, people with immune-compromised conditions and travellers from endemic areas comprise specific population risk groups.
-West Nile Virus: West Nile Virus is caused by Culex mosquitoes and is seen in animals and birds.
However, according to a few medical reports, West Nile Virus can also affect human cells and is transferred through breastfeeding from mothers to children.
It affects the blood circulation system in the body and affects the brain cells too.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention(CDC), most people do not develop any symptoms in West Nile disease.
In severe cases, symptoms such as high fever, headache, neck stiffness, stupor, disorientation, coma, tremors, convulsions, muscle weakness, vision loss, numbness and paralysis may occur.
People above 60 years of age are at a greater risk.
-Yellow Fever:
Yellow fever is caused by Aedes mosquitoes and the virus stays in the human body for a period of three to seven days.
One can exhibit symptoms such as headache, fever and nausea only after that.
advertisement
They are mostly found in South America and Africa and, as of now, only temporary treatments for yellow fever have been developed.
One must follow extreme hygiene and health conditions to avoid yellow fever.
However, in most cases, the patient is seen to retract if the vaccine is not showing effective signs of improvement.
-Chikungunya:
Chikungunya is caused by Aedes mosquitoes and some of its common symptoms are headache, joint pain, vomiting, back pain and skin rashes.
It is considered a viral disease and, in most cases, a patient takes seven days to recover.
In some cases, the pain may last for months or even years and it has some similar symptoms to Zika and dengue, which requires immediate medical attention.
One must drink plenty of fluids and stay hydrated by drinking enough water in Chikungunya.
You should take medication recommended by doctors and medical professionals and follow a well-balanced diet.
READ ALSO| Dengue Fever: Want to protect yourself and others from Dengue?
Know how
READ ALSO| Here’s how to prevent mosquito bites when traveling abroad
Researchers say skin rashes should be considered 4th symptom of COVID-19
Researchers from the United Kingdom said nearly 9% of the people who tested positive for COVID-19 reported having a skin rash.
Researchers from the United Kingdom said nearly 9% of the people who tested positive for COVID-19 reported having a skin rash.
Researchers from the United Kingdom said nearly 9% of the people who tested positive for COVID-19 reported having a skin rash.
Researchers from the United Kingdom said nearly 9% of the people who tested positive for COVID-19 reported having a skin rash.
HOUSTON, Texas (KTRK) --
A group of researchers from the United Kingdom said skin rashes should be considered a fourth key symptom of COVID-19.
Other key symptoms include cough, fever, or anosmia (loss of smell).
A study led by King's College London used data from a COVID-19 Symptoms Study app with 336,000 users.
Nearly nine percent of people who reportedly tested positive for COVID-19 had a skin rash.
RELATED:
Symptoms, prevention and number of confirmed cases
In a separate survey, 12,000 people with skin rashes were either confirmed to have COVID-19 or suspected they had the virus.
Another 21% said the rash was their only symptom.
If you think you may have COVID-19, doctors said it's best to self-isolate and get tested.
They recommend you only go to the emergency room if you're having difficulty breathing, experiencing chest pains, or other severe symptoms.
"Unless you have symptoms that you feel are life-threatening, rashes that come along with a fever or if you're feeling unwell, those are things or types of rashes that I would expect somebody to come to the emergency department for," said Dr. Theresa Tran, the assistant professor of emergency management at Baylor College of Medicine.
SEE MORE:
Doctors believe COVID-19 can cause heart attack and strokes in young patients
The study highlights the following three rash categories associate with COVID-19:
Hive-type rash (urticaria): Sudden appearance of raised bumps on the skin which come and go quite quickly over hours and are usually very itchy.
It can involve any part of the body and often starts with intense itching of the palms or soles, and can cause swelling of the lips and eyelids.
These rashes can present quite early on in the infection, but can also last a long time afterwards.
'Prickly heat' or chicken pox-type rash (erythemato-papular or erythemato-vesicular rash): Areas of small, itchy red bumps that can occur anywhere on the body, but particularly the elbows and knees as well as the back of the hands and feet.
The rash can persist for days or weeks.
COVID fingers and toes (chilblains): Reddish and purplish bumps on the fingers or toes, which may be sore but not usually itchy.
This type of rash is most specific to COVID-19, is more common in younger people with the disease, and tends to present later on.
Follow Raven Ambers on Twitter and Facebook.
Celiac disease is a chronic autoimmune disorder with one trigger: gluten.
When someone with celiac disease consumes gluten, their immune system responds by damaging the small intestine.
That can lead to a host of health problems, and the inflammation brought on by this immune response can contribute to a wide array of symptoms.
These symptoms differ from person to person and can affect every system of the body.
Here are the common symptoms of celiac disease you should know about.
Gastrointestinal issues
When you think about celiac disease, you might first think about gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms.
“For a large portion of people—40% to 60%—their main manifestation of the disease is gastrointestinal,” Salvatore Alesci, MD, PhD, chief scientist and strategy officer at the patient advocacy and research organisation Beyond Celiac, tells Health.
These symptoms can include constipation, diarrhoea, cramps, bloating, and gas.
Producing stool that floats or that is foul-smelling is another possible symptom of celiac disease, according to the American College of Gastroenterology.
It can be difficult to differentiate these symptoms from other common GI problems, like irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).
“Before I diagnose someone with IBS, I rule out celiac,” Amy Burkhart, MD, an integrative medicine physician and registered dietitian who specialises in gut health, tells Health.
The first step is a simple antibody blood test.
A biopsy of the small intestine can confirm the diagnosis.
One thing to remember is that if you are getting a blood test for celiac disease, you need to continue to consume gluten before the test so that you get an accurate result.
Non-GI symptoms
While GI symptoms might be the most common way celiac disease shows up, 40-60% of people with the condition don’t have any GI symptoms, according to Dr. Alesci.
And an absence of the telltale GI symptoms is the number one reason why patients are misdiagnosed or stay undiagnosed, he says.
Here are some common non-GI symptoms of celiac disease to be aware of.
Brain fog
“Most people don’t think about celiac disease as a disease of the brain, but there is a group of researchers at the University of Sheffield in the UK that have shown that people with celiac have damage to their brains,” Dr. Alesci says.
One of the things that the study found was that those with celiac disease had slower reaction times.
Short-term memory loss, inability to concentrate or find the right word, and attention difficulties are other neurological signs of celiac disease, Dr. Alesci adds.
Anxiety and depression
When your body is under constant threat from chronic inflammation, you may also experience anxiety, Dr. Alesci says.
Malabsorption of nutrients from celiac disease may also impact brain function to predispose you to depression.
Making things even more complicated is the fact that the challenges stemming from a diagnosis of a chronic condition itself is associated with mental health disorders, according to Beyond Celiac.
Coordination and balance problems
The same antibodies that attack your small intestine can also be found in a brain region called the cerebellum, which controls coordination and movement, Dr. Alesci says.
“Patients may have poor coordination in their balance, gait, and eye movements,” he says.
Numbness, tingling, and weakness (neuropathy) are also symptoms of celiac disease.
Bone density loss
Osteopenia (early bone density loss) and osteoporosis (a disease where bones are weak and brittle) is a risk when you have celiac disease.
It results from a malabsorption of calcium and vitamin D3, according to Dr. Alesci.
A gluten-free diet will help with absorption of these nutrients from your diet, but you’ll also likely have to take supplements, he says.
Thyroid disorder
Another downstream effect of not absorbing calcium: thyroid dysfunction.
Not getting enough calcium can trigger the parathyroid glands to produce more parathyroid hormone, Dr. Alesci explains.
(The parathyroid glands are four pea-sized glands on the thyroid gland, which is located at the base of your neck.)
The resulting condition, called hyperparathyroidism, can also lead to weakened bones, as well as kidney stones, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (US).
Dental problems
Enamel defects, like spots on teeth, and recurrent canker sores are possible signs of celiac disease, according to Dr. Burkhart.
“If you’re getting mouth sores on a regular basis or experiencing other dental issues like fractures and tooth decay, that should trigger a celiac screening,” she says.
Chronic stress or inflammation may play a role in the development of mouth sores.
In addition, your tongue may burn and feel dry, which has to do with malabsorption of vitamin B12, folate, and iron, the Celiac Disease Foundation reports.
Overtime, if you’re not on a gluten-free diet, these symptoms may increase the odds of oral and oesophageal cancers.
Anaemia
Anaemia can result from not consuming or absorbing enough iron, the nutrient that helps your body make haemoglobin, a protein in the blood that ferries oxygen around your body and is necessary for energy.
The go-to treatment is iron supplements.
However, if anaemia does not get better after supplementation, this is a potential sign of celiac disease, Dr. Burkhart explains.
Unexplained infertility
Celiac disease can make it hard to get and stay pregnant.
That’s because the antibodies produced from eating gluten may attack the placenta, Dr. Alesci says.
Research has suggested that between 1%-3% percent of women with unexplained infertility had undiagnosed celiac disease, according to Beyond Celiac.
Some studies have even found the prevalence to be as high as 8%.
Other studies show that undiagnosed celiac disease also causes lower fertility rates among men.
Unexplained fatigue and weight loss
With all the stress and demands of daily life, it’s not unusual to feel tired or realise you’ve lost weight.
While these are both extremely common, they can point to a host of diseases, including autoimmune disorders.
So if you’re feeling extra fatigued or are losing weight even though you are not trying to (which can happen if you’re not absorbing nutrients properly), talk to your doctor about the potential explanation being celiac disease.
How do you know if your symptoms are being caused by celiac disease?
One of the tough things about diagnosing celiac disease is that there are so many symptoms that show up all over the body.
There are more than 300 known symptoms of celiac disease, Beyond Celiac notes.
And yet, “celiac is the most underdiagnosed or misdiagnosed disease among all of the chronic autoimmune disorders,” Dr. Alesci says.
Diagnosis often requires connecting the dots between seemingly unrelated symptoms—and you might see different specialists for each problem.
While one in 100 people have celiac disease, just 17% are aware of it.
“Celiac has a reputation as a rare disease, but I do not consider 1 in 100 rare,” Dr. Burkhart says.
While people who develop celiac disease have a genetic predisposition to the disease, there also needs to be an environmental trigger that sets the disease process in motion.
Triggers can include things like viral illnesses, pregnancy, menopause, or dietary factors, according to Dr. Burkhart.
Since celiac disease can run in families, it’s important to tell your doctor if a first- or second-degree family member has the condition, which can help you get tested sooner.
How can you manage symptoms of celiac disease?
Once diagnosed, “the only treatment is a lifelong strict, gluten-free diet,” Dr. Burkhart says.
Because of that, some patients don’t want to know if they have celiac—something that’s understandable given the dietary changes—but it’s critical to know.
Having celiac disease and not following a gluten-free diet increases your risk of cancer of the small intestine and oesophagus; it can also lead to a narrowing of the small intestine due to inflammation.
Your risk for osteoporosis, infertility, neuropathy, and several vitamin deficiencies are also increased if you don’t manage your celiac disease, according to the American College of Gastroenterology.
This story first appeared on www.health.com
Main and featured image: Adobestock
© 2021.
Health Media Ventures, Inc. .
All rights reserved.
Licensed from Health.com and published with permission of Health Media Ventures, Inc. .
Reproduction in any manner in any language in whole or in part without prior written permission is prohibited.
Health and the Health Logo are registered trademarks of Health Media Ventures, Inc. Used under License.
Since it emerged in November 2021, the Omicron COVID variant has completely changed the course of the pandemic.
From the symptoms to how it spreads, everything about this variant was different from its predecessors.
At the same time, even with over 500 subvariants circulating, Omicron cousins have few things in common, they are all highly transmissible, replicate in the upper respiratory tract and they all have mutations that make them escape built-up immunity more easily.
Moreover, though they tend to cause less severe infections as compared to their predecessors, some symptoms seem to be common.
Let's delve deeper to understand this:
Zoe COVID app, which keeps track of COVID symptoms through positive patients using the app, notified that most Omicron patients complain of diarrhea.
Even those who have suffered from Delta and Alpha variants had also complained of this symptom.
What happens when you have diarrhea during COVID?
The experience of COVID diarrhea is very similar to how we feel sick from a regular stomach bug.
Zoe COVID app’s data showed, one in five patients gets COVID diarrhea after being infected with Delta or Omicron strains, even if they had two or three doses of vaccination.
Further, 30 percent of patients with the Alpha variant (dominant in late 2020) experienced diarrhea.
How long does it last?
In case you contract COVID, diarrhea can hit you on the first day of your infection and might increase in intensity during the first week of illness.
According to the Zoe health app, COVID diarrhea can last for up to seven days.
They also reported that having diarrhea as a COVID symptom was found to be linked to a greater risk of hospitalization, especially among people who also experienced abdominal pain and unusual muscle pain.
How the vaccines have helped?
While vaccines reduced the impact of Omicron, they themselves were impacted: studies have shown that vaccine effectiveness against infection, disease, hospitalization and death waned (though at different rates) over time.
However, protection against hospitalization and death have remained high, preventing millions of people from dying, WHO pointed out
Milestone Alert!
Livemint tops charts as the fastest growing news website in the world 🌏
Click here to know more.
Unlock a world of Benefits!
From insightful newsletters to real-time stock tracking, breaking news and a personalized newsfeed - it's all here, just a click away!
Login Now!
Madonna is reportedly still suffering severe symptoms from her illness despite being released from hospital.
The ‘Material Girl’ singer, 64, was reported on Thursday (29.06.23) to be back home after she was rushed to an intensive care unit in New York at the weekend, but sources say she is now bedridden in her house in the city.
TMZ said insiders have told them the singer has also been “vomiting uncontrollably” since she got back to her house.
The insiders said she first began being sick on Saturday (24.06.23) when the symptoms started and that she also “collapsed” at the time.
Sources previously told Page Six that Madonna had become “unresponsive” at one point and had to be intubated for at least one night at the hospital.
Insiders also told the outlet Madonna had been “strenuously rehearsing” for weeks and putting in “12-hour days” in preparation.
But TMZ is reporting she had been ill for some time and ignored symptoms including a “low-level fever” for up to a month.
Madonna’s long-time manager Guy Oseary, 50, revealed Madonna’s illness and said her upcoming ‘Celebration Tour’ was being put on hold in an Instagram post shared on Wednesday.
He said: “On Saturday June 24, Madonna developed a serious bacterial infection which led to a several day stay in the ICU.
“Her health is improving, however she is still under medical care.
A full recovery is expected.
“At this time we will need to pause all commitments, which includes the tour.
“We will share more details with you as soon as we have them, including a new start date for the tour and for rescheduled shows.”
(HealthDay)—Can eating a highly restrictive "few-foods diet" ease the classic symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in kids?
New research suggests that short-term nutritional intervention, which tests whether certain foods are a trigger for ADHD symptoms through the process of elimination, might make a difference.
ADHD can result in inattentiveness, hyperactivity and impulsiveness, and nutrition can play a part in managing symptoms, the European researchers said.
In the case of this study, the most stringent diets consisted of rice, turkey, vegetables (cabbage, beets, cauliflower, sprouts, lettuce), pears, olive oil, ghee (clarified butter), salt and drinks with added calcium and water.
During the first two weeks of the diet, other foods were added, including lamb, butter and small portions of wheat, corn, potatoes, some fruits and honey.
The authors explained the eating plan eventually results in a personalized diet excluding only those foods the patient reacts to, which could be food with allergens or any everyday food.
Other studies have shown children often react to more than one food.
"This knowledge underlines the importance of applying a [few-foods diet] as a standardized intervention in further research into the effect of food on ADHD," wrote authors Saartje Hontelez and Tim Stobernack, from Wageningen University and Research in the Netherlands, and their colleagues.
The study included 79 boys between the ages of 8 and 10 who had ADHD.
Parents completed the ADHD Rating Scale before and after the boys switched to the few-foods diet for several weeks.
Researchers also did MRI brain scans before and after the diet.
The team found that 63% of the kids had a least a 40% decrease in ADHD symptoms after the few-foods diet.
Some of the symptoms they looked at included:
avoiding assignments or having trouble wrapping up details of a project,
interrupting,
being distracted by other things or people,
having trouble remembering appointments or obligations.
In addition to seeing an easing of symptoms, the researchers reported that a whole-brain analysis showed an association between ADHD symptom improvements and increased activation in a brain region associated with visuospatial processing.
ADHD experts in the United States weighed in on the challenges of such a restrictive eating plan.
"The improvement in ADHD symptoms is commensurate with that reported in previous studies of [the few-foods diet], which have indicated a robust effect size," said Mary Solanto, professor of pediatrics and psychiatry at Cohen Children's Medical Center in New Hyde Park, N.Y.
Solanto noted the study's lack of a control group and said it did not reach its primary aim of discovering the critical biomarkers of this behavior improvement.
The diet is also lengthy and arduous for parents and children, she added, and may not be feasible in general practice.
"Further study of potentially critical biomarkers may enable quicker, more direct identification and elimination of offending foods," Solanto said.
She noted that the results of this study are consistent with a previous review of six meta-analyses of the few-foods diet in revealing a robust effect in reducing the core symptoms of ADHD.
Stimulant and non-stimulant medications, behavior therapy and the combination of the two remain the treatments of choice for ADHD, Solanto said.
The study suggested that prescribed drugs are not effective 24 hours per day and can cause sleeping problems, decreased appetite, headache and stomachache, so finding alternative treatments is important.
The findings were published recently in the journal Scientific Reports.
Carey Heller, a psychologist from Maryland who works with people who have ADHD, said he always feels skeptical about studies that consider diet for treating ADHD.
"Eating as healthy as possible for most people is going to make things at least somewhat better, but I think … when there's a focus on this diet or that diet for ADHD sometimes it creates this false understanding of what causes ADHD, or that diet can be a proven mechanism for treatment without anything else," he said.
Still, how parents help manage their child's ADHD and their environment can impact their symptoms, Heller said.
Best practices include behavioral treatment, such as psychotherapy or ADHD coaching, paired with medication, he said.
Behavioral treatments can help some gain important tools for managing their symptoms, Heller said.
He suggested that parents have good communication with their child's health care provider, always talking before starting a new treatment or approach.
"Everyone's different in terms of what's best for them," Heller said.
More information: The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more on ADHD.
Saartje Hontelez et al, Correlation between brain function and ADHD symptom changes in children with ADHD following a few-foods diet: an open-label intervention trial, Saartje Hontelez et al, Correlation between brain function and ADHD symptom changes in children with ADHD following a few-foods diet: an open-label intervention trial, Scientific Reports (2021).
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01684-7 Journal information: Scientific Reports
Copyright © 2021 HealthDay.
All rights reserved.
Two days after fourth-grade teacher Irma Garcia was killed in the Uvalde, Texas school shooting, her husband, Joe Garcia, suddenly died as well.
Family members attributed his death to a broken heart.
Irma Garcia’s nephew, John Martinez, said Joe collapsed at home on Thursday shortly after delivering flowers for Irma's memorial.
Doctors said a sudden death following a tragedy could be evidence of broken heart syndrome, a rare condition that mimics a heart attack.
"In general, when broken heart syndrome occurs, it’s after an extreme stressor," said Dr. Deepak Bhatt, a cardiologist at Brigham and Women’s Hospital.
"It’s highly likely that the stress of his spouse’s death is what triggered this," he said.
But Dr. Harmony Reynolds, a cardiologist at NYU Langone, noted that traumatic events can also trigger fatal heart attacks.
"It’s far more likely that he just had a heart attack that was brought on by intense emotional distress," she said.
What causes broken heart syndrome?
Heart attacks are caused by blocked arteries that cut off blood supply to the heart.
People with broken heart syndrome, on the other hand, release bursts of stress hormones like adrenaline that prevent their hearts from contracting properly.
The condition is formally known as takotsubo cardiomyopathy.
Doctors have identified broken heart syndrome in around 2 percent of patients with suspected heart attacks, according to Cleveland Clinic.
It often occurs shortly after a stressful event such as a car accident, financial loss or unexpected death of a loved one.
People can also develop broken heart syndrome after a positive, emotionally charged event like a surprise party or winning the lottery, or after a physical event like extreme exercise.
“Not all takotsubo syndrome is triggered by emotional or physical distress, but sometimes it is — about two-thirds of the time,” Reynolds said.
Other times, she added, there's no trigger at all.
Bhatt said some people may experience broken heart syndrome within minutes of bad news being delivered, while others may take time to emotionally process a traumatic event.
“It might be hours later and, in some cases, it might be a day later.
It might be when someone realizes, ‘Oh, wow, my loved one actually is dead.
They’re really not coming back,'" Bhatt said.
What are the symptoms of broken heart syndrome?
Unusual chest discomfort or shortness of breath following a stressful event may be an indication of broken heart syndrome, but there aren’t always warning signs, Bhatt said.
"If they're new, concerning symptoms, seek prompt medical attention — typically calling 911," he said.
"Unfortunately, sometimes the first manifestation of a heart attack is a fatal one, so not everyone has symptoms.
"
From the outside, broken heart syndrome looks the same as a standard heart attack.
Doctors use imaging tests to distinguish between the two and determine how to treat patients.
"For the broken heart syndrome, there's no blocked arteries, so you would just manage the person with medicines," Bhatt said.
“So from a doctor perspective, it’s really important to know which type it is, but from the perspective of the person that might be having it, it’s a medical emergency in either case.
"
The condition is most common among women ages 50 and up: Women represented around 88 percent of cases of broken heart syndrome in a 2021 study.
A 2020 study also found that anxiety disorders were more prevalent in patients with broken heart syndrome than among healthy people.
Can you recover from broken heart syndrome?
Around 1 percent of people with broken heart syndrome ultimately die of it, according to Cleveland Clinic.
Many people make a full recovery within about a month and don’t have long-term heart damage.
Reynolds said there's no known method for preventing broken heart syndrome, though she's researching whether deep breathing might help.
Doctors said it's always important to maintain good physical and mental health, even in the wake of a tragedy, to decrease the risk heart disease.
"It's still important to try to eat right, try to get enough sleep and try to keep stress under control to the extent possible, and to ask for help if needed," Bhatt said.
Share on Pinterest Getty Images/HUIZENG HU
As the weather dives into lower temps, we enter yet another cold and flu season.
It’s the time of year when the chances of “coming down with something” increase.
If you do end up with either a cold or the flu, you can take a proactive approach to support your body in recovering as fast as possible.
Though there’s currently no cure for the common cold or flu, simply letting your sickness run its roughly 10-day course isn’t the only option.
For starters, getting your flu shot can go a long way toward prevention.
On top of that, you can boost your immunity even more to potentially prevent catching something in the first place.
If you do end up getting sick, there are ways to help reduce symptom severity and speed you toward recovery.
One way to do that is with Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) remedies that may stimulate your body’s natural healing capabilities.
What is Traditional Chinese Medicine?
TCM is a type of traditional medicine system that originated in China.
It involves a comprehensive toolkit of complementary practices, including: herbalism
diet therapy
physical approaches like tai chi and qi gong
acupuncture
gua sha
cupping
massage, or tuina
sports medicine TCM’s philosophy is generally based on the Chinese concepts of: qi, the vital energy believed to guide physical and mental processes
yin and yang, the opposing energies of life
Wu Xing, or five elements theory According to Leng Tang-Ritchie, doctor of acupuncture and oriental medicine (DAOM) and director of clinical services at Pacific College of Health and Science, different factors may lead to the common cold and flu depending on how the condition presents in each individual person.
“That means that we treat differently depending on whether the patient’s symptoms are predominately presenting as heat, cold, or even dampness,” says Tang-Ritchie.
“In Western medicine, we describe it as a common cold or flu,” says Debbie Kung, DAOM and licensed acupuncturist (LAc).
In TCM, she notes, the perspective focuses on the individual.
“We actually look at it as different scenarios,” says Kung.
“It could be a qi issue, a blood issue, or yin and yang issue — so it’s a little bit different.”
An ounce of prevention Strengthening your immune system is the first step in preventing the cold or flu.
“Keeping your immune system healthy is best,” advises doctor of acupuncture and Chinese medicine (DACM)
Tom Ingegno.
“Visits to your TCM practitioner during late summer and early fall can help build up your immune system with herbs and acupuncture that are specifically aimed at keeping you healthy.”
So how do you keep your immune system in tip-top shape?
Get plenty of rest.
Focus on a nutritionally varied diet rich in fruits and vegetables.
Find constructive ways to manage stress, like meditation.
Get plenty of vitamin C.
Traditional Chinese herbal remedies In addition to prevention, TCM uses herbs and foods to help support your body’s natural healing function.
According to Irina Logman, DACM and owner of the Advanced Holistic Center at Carillon Miami, “Practitioners can identify weak links in the patient’s constitution and prescribe a treatment plan to strengthen that element.”
She suggests getting a personalized blend of herbs based on an assessment by a licensed professional.
“Although individual herbs are great, the real magic comes in Chinese herbal formulas,” says Logman.
“Chinese herbs and herbology are basically the backbone of Chinese medicine,” says Kung.
“Herbs are actually the best thing when it comes to the common cold and flu.”
Still, Kung cautions that there are important things to keep in mind when taking herbs, like: take only herbs suggested by a board certified TCM practitioner
tell your practitioner about any other medications you take or conditions you have
take herbs consistently for the prescribed period of time Licensed, board certified TCM practitioners are required to memorize over 3,000 herbs, dosages, and interactions with other herbs and medications.
They can tell you: what kind of herbs you may need
whether to take them in capsule, tincture, or tea form
how often you should take them Consistently taking herbs is key to seeing the best results.
Some common herbal formulations include: jade windscreen, or Yu Ping Feng San
a ginger, turmeric, and cinnamon blend
Gui Zhi Tang
Yin Qiao San Jade windscreen powder This is a classic herbal mix used in China since the Yu Ping Feng San dynasty, which translates as “jade windscreen” in English.
The mix is a powdered blend of: astragalus root
atractylodes rhizome
rhizome siler root
It’s used to bolster the immune system and safeguard the body from viral and bacterial infections.
Warming herbs like ginger, turmeric, and cinnamon When sick, you can easily make yourself a warming tea with these common kitchen herbs.
“When it comes to common colds and the flu, you want to break a sweat to get everything out,” says Kung.
“These help to heat up the body in a way that’s not too dangerous.
It pushes and brings on the sweat and helps to warm up the body.”
Ginger is already known to be antiviral and antibacterial, and it helps with reducing nausea.
Chop the ginger up and steep in hot water, adding honey or lemon to taste.
Full of antioxidants as well as anti-inflammatory benefits, turmeric can be added to bone broth or taken in pill form.
Like turmeric, cinnamon is also full of antioxidants and anti-inflammatory agents.
It can help fight bacterial and fungal infections.
You can make a tea of cinnamon, Chinese dates, and ginger to help with cold and flu symptoms.
Gui Zhi Tang You might recognize the ingredients in Gui Zhi Tang: cinnamon
white peony root
fresh ginger
Chinese red dates, or jujube fruit
licorice root
honey
This blend is recommended by Tang-Ritchie for a cold or flu that comes with: chills
body aches
clear nasal discharge
slight sweating “This formula will relieve body aches, encourage sweating, and act as a decongestant,” she says.
“Patients should drink lots of warm fluids while taking this formula.”
Yin Qiao San
For colds that lean more toward a mild fever, chills, and a slight sore throat, Tang-Ritchie suggests the Yin Qiao San herbal formula.
It includes: honeysuckle flowers
peppermint leaves
fermented soybeans, or natto
forsythia
bamboo leaves
edible burdock
balloon flower root The formula may help reduce thirst and fever and relieve a sore throat.
“Both honeysuckle flowers and forsythia have strong antiviral properties,” says Tang-Ritchie.
“Sometimes, Yin Qiao San is combined with a stronger antiviral formula called Gan Mao Ling (a common cold effective remedy) if the sore throat is more pronounced.”
Take only herbs prescribed by a board certified, licensed TCM practitioner.
Even though many of the above ingredients are mild, it’s always best to check with a professional when taking any herbs regularly.
Traditional Chinese treatments for cold and flu TCM emphasizes holistic wellness and balance, which means it often involves more than one approach.
The below treatments can support cold and flu prevention and recovery in addition to herbs.
Gua Sha Gua sha involves repeatedly scraping your skin in a downward motion with a tool after applying an unguent, like massage oil or balm.
It can be performed by a TCM practitioner or you can do it at home if your practitioner shows you how.
“Try gua sha on the chest and upper back,” suggests Ingegno.
He notes that though we see many influencers using gua sha tools for facial treatments, one of its real uses is to break up congestion in the lungs.
“By scraping these areas and breaking surface capillaries, we increase circulation to symptomatic areas and stimulate a healing response, including an increase in white blood cells,” Ingegno adds.
Acupuncture Acupuncture involves inserting tiny needles into specific points on the skin to stimulate a desired response.
It may calm inflammation caused by cold or flu viruses and help your immune system defend your body by promoting circulation, wound healing, and pain modulation.
Cupping TCM practitioners can use cupping to create suction and increase blood flow to an area by placing cups on the skin.
This can alleviate muscle tension and promote cellular and connective tissue repair.
“Cupping and gua sha on the upper back can help clear congestion in the chest, reduce symptoms, and ease breathing discomfort,” explains Tang-Ritchie.
“We use a combination of these techniques depending on the specifics of each patient’s case.”
Moxibustion The TCM practice of moxibustion involves burning moxa, a cone made of ground mugwort leaves, either directly on your skin or indirectly on acupuncture needles in your body.
According to a 2018 research review , studies have shown that moxibustion can increase white blood cell count and immunity.
Find a practitioner Always be sure that you receive treatments like acupuncture, cupping, gua sha, moxibustion, and herbal remedies from a practitioner who holds an active professional license to practice in your state.
You can search online for the professional licenses recognized by the state you live in.
If you live in New York, for example, you can use a tool on the Office of the Professions website to check out your practitioner’s credentials.
You can also check with the National Certification Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine (NCCAOM) to see whether your practitioner is accredited.
Takeaway Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) offers a broad toolkit of practices and herbs to help support you through the cold and flu season.
As with all medical and complementary treatments, always seek treatment from a licensed medical professional.
Never take herbs or perform any of the practices mentioned on your own without consulting a practitioner.
Done properly, TCM practices can help you get through cold and flu season with a little extra support.
Stronger brain wave abnormalities are significantly associated with more severe cognitive, motor, and communication symptoms and earlier seizure onset in children and adolescents with Angelman syndrome (AS), a study shows.
These findings support brain activity abnormalities as a core Angelman feature, and they support the use of electroencephalography (EEG) as a biomarker in clinical trials of potential Angelman therapies.
EEG is a non-invasive method used to measure electrical activity in the brain that provides readouts in the form of waves (i.e., brainwaves).
The study, “Electrophysiological Abnormalities in Angelman Syndrome Correlate With Symptom Severity,” was published in the journal Biological Psychiatry Global Open Science.
Angelman syndrome is a complex neurological condition caused by a lack of working UBE3A protein in nerve cells due to genetic defects.
Recommended Reading Study Finds Differences in Brain Activity Based on Genotype in Angelman Patients
People with Angelman have highly abnormal EEG results, with excessive spontaneous delta waves as the most characteristic and robust disease feature across all ages and types of disease-causing genetic deficits.
Electrical activity in the brain can be measured as brainwaves (oscillations) with different frequencies.
Brainwaves are produced by electrical pulses from nerve cells (neurons) communicating with each other.
They are divided into different bandwidths, specifically infra-low, delta, theta, alpha, beta, and gamma, that change according to what an individual is doing and feeling.
Delta waves are large, low-frequency waves typically found during deep sleep.
While these abnormalities may contribute to the neurological deficits associated with Angelman, whether EEG abnormalities are associated with disease symptoms and their significance in the mechanisms underlying Angelman remain unclear.
“Solving this open question is highly important to gain a better understanding of AS [Angelman syndrome] and to understand the utility of EEG-derived metrics as biomarkers for clinical trials in this population,” the researchers wrote.
To address this, scientists at Roche and at children’s hospitals in the U.S. analyzed demographic, clinical, and EEG data from 45 pediatric patients (30 boys and 15 girls) who participated in the AS Natural History Study (NCT00296764).
In all patients, the disease was caused by a deletion of a large region of DNA containing at least the UBE3A gene — which provides the instructions to produce UBE3A. This type of genetic abnormality accounts for about 70% of Angelman cases, and usually causes a more severe form of the disease.
Children’s mean age was 59 months (nearly 5 years), 42 (93.3%) of them had epilepsy, and 16 (35.6%) had more than one and up to five visits, at least one year apart, during the study.
Motor, cognitive, and language skills were assessed with the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development (BSID), adaptive behavior and motor function through the caregiver-reported Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales (VABS), and Angelman-specific symptoms using the AS Clinical Severity Scale.
EEG was done when patients were awake.
The researchers evaluated potential links between EEG abnormalities, particularly those involving delta waves, and these validated clinical measures, as well as with age of seizure onset.
After adjusting for age, results showed that stronger delta wave abnormalities were significantly associated with earlier epilepsy onset and lower scores in several clinical measures and domains, reflecting worse global development, cognitive function, communication abilities, motor skills, and adaptive behaviors.
“This is consistent with the global and severe impairment in AS characterized by a high degree of correlation between symptom domains,” the researchers wrote.
Whether changes in symptoms across different visits corresponded to changes in delta waves was then assessed.
Data from the 16 children with multiple visits showed that greater delta wave abnormalities were associated with poorer performance in all but one clinical score over time.
These links reached statistical significance for the BSID mean as an indirect measure of global development, BSID’s cognitive score, and VABS’s daily living skills-personal, and social-coping skills.
Further analyses using machine learning showed that EEG signals at other frequencies (other wave types) also significantly associated with clinical severity.
Machine learning is a type of artificial intelligence that uses algorithms to analyze data, learn from its analyses, and then make a prediction about something.
Including all wave types in the analysis resulted in stronger associations (by about 45%) between EEG abnormalities and symptom severity, reaching statistical significance in some additional scores relative to the delta wave-exclusive analysis.
These findings highlight that “the abnormal delta-band EEG in AS is related cross-sectionally and longitudinally to severity as measured with several different clinical scales as well as the age of epilepsy onset,” the researchers wrote.
As such, the data “provide strong evidence that excess low-frequency neuronal oscillations reflect a core aspect of AS [mechanisms],” they added.
The work also “strengthens the rationale for using EEG as a biomarker in the development of treatments for AS,” as it could serve as a short-term indirect measure of symptom severity, “offering a more immediate and objective assessment of whether a treatment is likely to be beneficial,” the team wrote.
Future studies are needed to confirm whether these associations are also true for patients with other disease-causing genetic abnormalities, as well as to “disentangle the contributions of different EEG features and link them to specific [disease features],” the researchers concluded.
Dr Chris discusses CT scans detecting lung cancer
Lung cancer is one of the most serious types of cancer to be diagnosed, as it’s usually difficult to spot until it has spread to other parts of the body.
But it's still crucial that you know what signs to look out for.
Lung cancer is one of the most common cancers to be diagnosed in the UK, warned the NHS.
Around 45,000 people are diagnosed with lung cancer in the UK every year.
Signs of the disease only tend to reveal themselves once the cancer has spread through the lungs.
All lung cancer patients have different symptoms, and there are three key signs that might be easily missed.
READ MORE: Hair loss: How alcohol can cause your hair to thin
Lung cancer symptoms: The three 'early' signs of lung cancer you might be missing
Some patients develop a swelling in their face or neck, according to the Cancer Treatment Centres of America (CTCA).
You might also find it difficult to swallow food, or experience unusual pain while swallowing.
Meanwhile, finger clubbing could also be caused by lung cancer, it added.
Finger clubbing is where the appearance of your fingers change.
Your nails might start to curve around the edge of your fingers, for example.
DON'T MISS
Lung cancer symptoms: Two telltale signs on your eyes [ANALYSIS]
Lung cancer signs: Symptoms in your fingers [LATEST]
Lung cancer sign in feet: Little known symptom you shouldn't ignore [RESEARCH]
SUBSCRIBE Invalid email We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you.
This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding.
You can unsubscribe at any time.
Read our Privacy Policy
"The early symptoms of lung cancer may be a slight cough or shortness of breath, depending on which part of the lung is affected," said CTCA.
"As the cancer develops, these symptoms may become more severe or intense.
"Like many other types of cancer, lung cancer may also cause systemic symptoms, like loss of appetite or general fatigue.
"Although most of these symptoms are more likely to be caused by something other than lung cancer, it's important to see a doctor.
"
Lung cancer symptoms: Speak to a doctor if you're worried about the signs of lung cancer
READ MORE Statins warning: The 90p drink that interacts to make it 'toxic' The more common signs of the disease include coughing up blood, wheezing, and even having an unexplained pain in your back.
Some patients might even start to feel fatigued without doing exercise.
However, as lung cancer develops, patients might notice some more common warning signs.
Headaches, bone pain, jaundice, and unexplained dizziness are all caused by advanced lung cancer.
Trending
How MS Can Affect Your Breathing
There are a number of ways that MS can lead to breathing problems, including the following:
Lesions in the Brain
As multiple sclerosis progresses, lesions in your brain and spine can affect almost every aspect of your physical functioning.
It's possible that brain lesions could change your respiratory function, says Zulma Hernandez-Peraza, MD, a neurologist at the University of Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System in Chicago.
Lesions that disrupt the signals from the brain to the lungs can result in a condition known as central sleep apnea, in which breathing stops and restarts repeatedly during sleep, notes Dr. Reder.
Symptoms of central sleep apnea include waking up abruptly with shortness of breath, having shortness of breath that improves with sitting up, insomnia, daytime sleepiness, and chest pain at night.
A more common form of sleep apnea, where the upper airway becomes intermittently obstructed, can also occur in people with MS if the muscles that normally keep the airway open become slack due to lesions in the brain, adds Reder.
Obstructive sleep apnea is associated with snoring and obesity.
Spinal Lesions
These can cause weakness of the breathing muscles and also restrict your ability to get air in and out of the lungs, says neurologist Staley Brod, MD, professor of neurology at the Medical College of Wisconsin in Milwaukee.
“Weakness can affect breathing,” says Dr. Brod.
Spasticity in the muscles that help with inhaling and exhaling could also contribute to the problem.
“A lesion in the cervical spine creates the ‘MS hug' sensation, which can cause the feeling of shortness of breath,” adds Dr. Hernandez-Peraza.
“This is usually just an unpleasant perception.
When tested, the oxygen levels in your blood should be normal.”
Medication
One of the side effects of the MS disease-modifying drug Gilenya (fingolimod) is a reduction in some measures of breathing function, says Reder.
Some types of medication, such as tranquilizers, muscle relaxants, and opioids, can also slow or reduce breathing.
In 2019, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a warning that serious breathing difficulties may occur in people who have respiratory risk factors who are taking gabapentin (Neurontin, Gralise, Horizant) or pregabalin (Lyrica, Lyrica CR).
According to the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, these pain medications (known as gabapentinoids) are sometimes prescribed for people who have multiple sclerosis.
Talk to your doctor if you have respiratory risk factors including (but not limited to) chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or older age and you have been prescribed these medications, especially at high doses, notes Reder.
Overall, receipt of two doses of the BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine was associated with a substantial decrease in reporting most symptoms post SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Individuals who had received two doses reported no more of these symptoms than individuals never reporting infection.
Commonly reported post-acute COVID-19 symptoms are not specific to COVID-19 and are commonly reported regardless of infection status, for a variety of reasons.
It is not therefore expected that any group would report zero incidence of such symptoms.
The absence of difference in symptoms frequency among those who received two doses and those who reported never having been infected, in addition to the difference between those vaccinated and those not, strengthens our findings.
These associations were largely not seen among individuals who received a single dose of a COVID-19 vaccine.
Our results are consistent with the majority of other available studies on the topic demonstrating lower reporting of long-term symptoms following COVID-1917,19,21.
A recent review of the few available studies suggests most studies are finding a similar association22.
The magnitude of the association in this study is on the high end of the spectrum, comparable to some other published studies17, but larger than others21.
This study brings previously unavailable nuance on the effect of vaccination on reported long-term symptoms, in terms of comparison to baseline incidence of such symptoms, symptom specificity, and time from acute infection.
Approximately a third of participants in the current study continued to report post-COVID-19 symptoms, mostly fatigue, headache, and weakness.
Our findings are consistent with a recently published study reporting similar proportions of post-COVID-19 symptoms19.
An exploratory age-stratified analysis showed that the associations reported in the current study were largely confined to older age groups (above 60 years), a finding not consistent with a previous study reporting that the reduced reporting of symptoms was stronger in younger age groups23.
It is important to note that our age-stratified analysis was underpowered and studies specifically addressing the effect of age should be conducted before definite conclusions are drawn.
Our analysis does not allow us to establish why the reduction of long-term symptoms with the COVID-19 vaccine seems to be greater in older age groups.
A plausible explanation for the association found in the older individuals could be that younger individuals have more physiological reserve and are therefore able to recover on their own, which is not the case in older adults.
Other studies have reported that frailty was associated with both age and worse outcomes following SARS-CoV-2 infection24.
The unvaccinated and the vaccinated groups were comparable in socio-demographic characteristics except for age, reflecting vaccine coverage in the Israeli population25.
As a result, some chronic conditions present at baseline were more common in the vaccinated group.
However, since these conditions are more common in the older group who received two doses, we would anticipate even bigger differences between the vaccinated and unvaccinated group had we taken them into account in the analysis.
This difference in age between the vaccinated and the unvaccinated individuals is consistent with the COVID-19 vaccination strategy implemented by the Israeli Ministry of Health, which targeted the older population during the initial stages of the COVID-19 vaccination rollout.
The vaccinated and unvaccinated populations differed in terms of the proportion of asymptomatic individuals at acute COVID-19 presentation.
A higher proportion of those who received two doses were asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis compared to the unvaccinated group, and those who were symptomatic at baseline reported less symptoms compared with those unvaccinated.
These figures reflect the possibility of protection against symptomatic disease conferred by vaccines, which may also partly explain the lower proportion of reporting long-term symptoms among those vaccinated.
However, the protective effect of vaccination against long-term symptoms persisted after adjusting for asymptomatic disease, suggesting a reduction in reported post-SARS-CoV-2 infection symptoms even among those symptomatic at the time of infection.
The median follow-up duration was longer in the unvaccinated group than the individuals vaccinated with two doses.
This is consistent with the fact that our follow-up period started nine months before vaccines became available in Israel.
Nevertheless, the protective effect of vaccination remained after adjusting for time from beginning of symptoms to responding to the survey.
The adjusted model suggested an even stronger protective effect of vaccination against reported long-term symptoms.
Our study relied on self-reported positive PCR results and was conducted during a period when PCR testing was freely and widely available to all.
In Israel, most individuals have been PCR-tested multiple times for a range of reasons including being symptomatic, travelling, contact tracing, and screening.
Specimens for the same patients are tested in different laboratories.
Therefore, using positive lab results from a selection of laboratories (rather than all laboratories in the country) could lead to misclassification.
Considering the consequences on daily life, including quarantine, it is unlikely that someone would forget having tested positive for SARS-CoV-2, or vice versa.
It is however important to note that we could not completely validate that individuals who reported being never-infected, on the basis of never having tested positive, had an infection that was not detected.
However, the fact that all individuals in the uninfected group tested negative at least once (and likely multiple times for most) and did not report any acute COVID-19-like episode mitigates the risk of misclassification.
It is also important to note that the vaccination policy in Israel, at the time of the survey, specified that SARS-CoV-2-infected individuals were in theory only eligible for a single dose of vaccine.
Therefore, individuals who received one dose also differed from those who received two doses in terms of the sequence of events: while those who received two doses have mostly been infected after having been vaccinated, many among those who received a single dose have been infected prior to vaccination.
The proportion of individuals eligible for two doses who only received one was small.
Although our data does not allow to establish this sequence of events for each individual, the time from beginning of symptoms to responding to the survey reflect this difference.
Infection prior to vaccination could partially explain the observed lack of effect of one dose of vaccine regarding long-term reported symptoms.
The effect of vaccination on long-term sequelae according to the infection/vaccination sequence warrants further research.
With only few patients reporting having been hospitalised, our cohort reflects the mild end of the COVID-19 spectrum, and the results cannot necessarily be extrapolated to patients who were more severely ill (and hospitalised) in the acute phase of the illness.
Likewise, it is conceivable that individuals severely affected by their post-SARS-CoV-2 infection symptoms were less likely to reply to the survey, and we cannot ensure that the results are generalisable to this category of individuals.
Our study did not include children who are less likely to develop severe acute illness following infection but do report long-term effects26.
Prevention of long-term symptoms could be one of the most important benefits of vaccination in this age group.
At the time of this study, children under 12 years were not eligible for COVID-19 vaccines in Israel.
A final limitation is the self-reported nature of the symptoms, in particular since individuals who are eager to vaccinate may differ from those who do not vaccinate in terms of perceptions of health and illness.
In addition, asking individuals about a list of symptoms they experience enables to quantify but not qualify their experience.
Reported fatigue may translate to very different experiences for different individuals with a very different impact on their daily living.
Studies that measure the association between vaccination and long COVID in terms of activities of daily living, beyond symptom categories, are needed.
We minimised selection bias in this study by inviting all individuals who tested for SARS-CoV-2 at the study sites to participate.
However, recall and selection bias inherent to the methodology of cross-sectional population surveys cannot be entirely ruled out.
As a final limitation, Israel used almost exclusively the BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine, and the results are therefore only applicable to that vaccine.
Our findings suggest that in addition to preventing severe disease and death27,28, the BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine used in Israel, may be associated with a reduction in the reporting of symptoms post-acute SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Despite the methodological limitations described the strength of the effect and the consistency with the existing literature are encouraging.
Studies such as this one should be complemented by studies objectively measuring long-term health outcomes in COVID-19 patients in a clinical setting as well as studies investigating plausible biological mechanisms, which may help explain why an association is found with most symptoms, but not all.
Our cohort, which continues to recruit participants, will enable us to report with more precision whether the BNT162b2 mRNA’s protective effect reported in this study is sustained, how vaccination impacts on activities of daily living post-COVID, as well as the effect of the different SARS-CoV-2 variants and vaccination on post-COVID symptoms.
Health care workers participate in a mock drill for COVID-19 at a hospital in Mumbai, India.
India is experiencing a coronavirus surge driven by a new omicron subvariant that U.S. officials are closely watching for surge potential.
Rafiq Maqbool/Associated Press
A new COVID-19 subvariant “threatens to shatter” hopes to stave off a new coronavirus surge in the U.S. before next winter, and some experts worry it could be linked to the rise of a previously rare pandemic symptom.
COVID map: How many coronavirus cases are in Bay Area and California
XBB.1.16, which reached reportable levels in the U.S. last week, could be behind an uptick of conjunctivitis, especially in children, reports from India suggest, alongside the more common symptoms of fever, cough and fatigue.
The latest omicron subvariant, thought to be the most transmissible yet, is fueling a surge of cases in India.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data shows XBB.1.16 nearly doubled its proportion in the U.S. last week, although it still is considerably less prevalent than other subvariants circulating in the country.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
At the same time, pediatrician Vipin M. Vashishtha, a member of the World Health Organization’s Vaccine Safety Net program, also noted a rise in cases of “itchy conjunctivitis with sticky eyes” in India that appear to be to be associated with XBB.1.16, although no studies have yet been published to confirm the linkage.
“I think there’s a high probability it will lead to an increase of cases here,” Peter Chin-Hong, a UCSF infectious disease expert, said of the rapidly rising XBB.1.16.
He noted the highly infectious subvariant arrives amid “a bunch of different forces” including waning population-level immunity and people letting down their guard around spring break and Easter.
“A lot of people weren’t expecting to see another surge until next winter,” he said.
“XBB.1.16 threatens to shatter that.
It may make us reevaluate whether we’ve reached the endemic phase.”
The new lineage, also called Arcturus, has been observationally linked to an increase in reports of “COVID eye” in 29 countries, where researchers found the virus in the eye’s tear film causing inflammation.
“One new feature of cases caused by this variant is that it seems to be causing conjunctivitis, or red and itchy eyes, in young patients.
This is not something that we’ve seen with prior strains of the virus,” said Dr. Matthew Binnicker, director of the Mayo Clinic’s Clinical Virology Laboratory at Mayo Clinic.
Most of the reports are anecdotal, in the absence of definitive published studies on pink eye, which typically resolves on its own, as a symptom of COVID infection.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
The XBB.1.16 strain is estimated to be behind 7% of COVID cases in the U.S., and possibly as much as 15% in some regions, the CDC says.
In California, it made up nearly 10% of infections last week.
“This is a variant that has been under monitoring for a few weeks,” said Jorge Salinas, an epidemiologist and infectious disease expert at Stanford.
“It has shown it has the capacity to become more prevalent, to cause more transmission.”
Scientists are concerned that XBB.1.16 spreads rapidly and may get around immunity from vaccines and previous infections.
It does not appear to cause more severe disease than other omicron subvariants, including the dominant XBB.1.15, according to a COVID epidemiological update released Thursday by the World Health Organization.
“This is one to watch,” Maria Van Kerkhove, the WHO’s COVID-19 technical lead, said about XBB.1.16.
“It has one additional mutation in the spike protein which in lab studies shows increased infectivity as well as potential increased pathogenicity.”
So far, experts have only flagged a rise in conjunctivitis-like symptoms with this new strain.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
“If that is the modification in its severity, I don’t think pink eye is normally considered to be too severe,” Salinas said.
“If that is its main clinical difference, that would be good” by comparison to severe symptoms.
In India, which on Friday reported its most substantial increase in infections in nearly a year, XBB.1.16 has prompted the country to resume vaccine production and bring back mitigation measures such as indoor masking.
Even if symptoms stemming from the new subvariant are mild, increased disease prevalence could lead to more severe outcomes among people who are older or immunocompromised, Chin-Hong said.
He believes it could prompt U.S. officials to make a second bivalent booster available sooner rather than later for those who need to up their protection ahead of an anticipated surge.
“XBB.1.16 is making the conversation happen after the hemming and hawing,” around the need for a second bivalent booster, he said.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
XBB.1.16 arrives as COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations and deaths continue to fall in the U.S. As of Thursday, less than 1% of the nation’s counties were estimated to have high levels of COVID-19 in the community, according to federal data.
The current 7-day average of 14,491 weekly new cases marks a 17.3% decrease from a week earlier and is now at its lowest point since the summer of 2021.
The daily average of hospitalizations has reached 1,870, marking a 14.6% decrease from the prior 7-day average of 2,191.
The country is reporting 190 new deaths per day — the lowest figures since March 2020 and a 25.4% decline from two weeks ago.
California, reflecting national trends, reports an average of 1,376 new daily cases, or about 3.4 per 100,000 residents, as of Thursday.
The latest daily average of COVID patients in California hospitals was 1,437, with an average of 15 deaths each day — numbers roughly steady for three months.
Blood may appear black after exposure to oxygen in your uterus — this is completely normal.
Implantation, an object left in your vagina, miscarriage, or an STI can also cause black blood.
If you continue to experience dark bleeding with pain or other symptoms, call a doctor right away.
Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily.
Read preview Thanks for signing up!
Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go.
download the app Email address Sign up By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy .
You can opt-out at any time.
Advertisement
A small amount of black blood could happen for a number of reasons, including implantation or a missed miscarriage.
But as long as the spotting remains minor, you usually don't need to be concerned.
Black blood is simply blood that has been inside your vagina or uterus long enough to oxidize after exposure to oxygen.
This turns it darker, giving it the color you perceive as black, says Dr. Alan Lindemann, obstetrician and maternal mortality expert at PregnancyYourWay.com.
But black blood doesn't always mean you're pregnant.
Read on to learn why you might notice blood that appears black and what to do next.
Advertisement
Causes of black blood during or after pregnancy
Black blood during or after pregnancy happens for four main reasons:
1.
Implantation bleeding
Implantation bleeding, which typically occurs within two weeks after conception, happens when a fertilized egg attaches to the inner lining of your uterus.
This bleeding typically lasts less than three days, and you may mistake it for spotting.
This blood will usually range in color from dark brown to light pink, but very dark brown blood could appear black.
With implantation bleeding, you might also experience some light cramping, swollen or tender breasts, fatigue, and nausea or vomiting.
What to do next: If you think you could be pregnant, a good next step involves taking a home pregnancy test.
A healthcare professional can confirm a positive test result.
Advertisement
2.
Miscarriage
Most miscarriages occur within the first 13 weeks of pregnancy, but many happen before you realize you're pregnant.
In some cases, black blood can suggest miscarriage, though you'll likely also notice other symptoms, including:
In some rare cases, black blood could suggest a septic miscarriage, which can be life threatening.
What to do next: If you notice a large amount of black blood along with other signs of potential miscarriage, you should contact your doctor immediately, says Dr. Aaron Gelfand, Obstetrics & Gynecology Physician at ChoicePoint.
Advertisement
3.
Postpartum lochia
After giving birth, you'll bleed for about four to six weeks.
This postpartum bleeding, called lochia, starts out heavy and dark with plenty of clots.
It also contains mucus, excess white blood cells, and pieces of your uterine lining.
The first stage of lochia, which lasts up to several days, may appear black at times.
What to do next: Lochia is a natural part of giving birth, and it gradually resolves on its own after about six weeks.
But if you experience an atypically large amount of bleeding, such as filling one or more pads an hour, make an appointment with your doctor as soon as possible to rule out a possible postpartum hemorrhage (PPH).
Advertisement
4.
Placental abruption
Placental abruption, the premature detachment of the placenta, occurs in about one in every 120 pregnancies.
If this happens, you'll experience bleeding, typically dark red or almost black in color, though the amount of blood will depend on the size of the area that detached.
Important: Placental abruption can lead to hemorrhaging, so you'll need urgent medical attention if you bleed enough to completely fill a pad or tampon in under two hours.
Other symptoms of a placental abruption may include:
Extreme thirst
Nausea
Feeling dizzy or faint
Abdominal pain
Uterine contractions
Blood in the amniotic fluid
What to do next: Not all placental abruptions cause external bleeding, so it's important to contact your doctor immediately if you experience any of the above symptoms during the second trimester.
Your doctor may perform a physical exam, ultrasound, and monitor the fetal heartbeat to determine if you have a placental abruption.
Your specific treatment will depend upon how far along you are and how severe the abruption is.
Depending on the circumstances, your care team may suggest close observation or recommend inducing labor immediately.
Advertisement
Other possible explanations for black blood or discharge
Black blood or discharge doesn't always relate to pregnancy.
Other potential causes include:
1.
The beginning or end of your period
It's pretty common to experience black spotting or discharge on either end of your period.
Since blood oxidizes over time, and you often shed old blood at the beginning of your period, your initial discharge may appear black, dark brown, or similar in color and texture to coffee grounds, Gelfand says.
Depending on how slow your flow is, the blood in your uterus may have enough time to oxidize before it leaves your body.
But if you notice black blood once your period ends, you should reach out to your doctor as soon as possible — this could signal the presence of an infection or foreign object.
Advertisement
2.
A foreign object in your vagina
Black discharge outside of your regular menstrual cycle could suggest a foreign object in your vagina, such as a forgotten tampon, sex toy, condom, or other contraceptive devices.
Any of these can cause irritation and lead to an infection, which may include black discharge as one possible symptom.
If you do have an infection, you might also notice:
Discharge that smells foul, fishy, or rotten
Discomfort or itching
A rash or swelling in your genital area
Trouble urinating or pain when urinating
Fever
Abdominal pain
What to do next: If you've noticed any of the above symptoms, it never hurts to do a quick check and make sure nothing's stuck in your vagina.
If you can't remove the object yourself, get medical attention right away.
Without treatment, the infection could get worse or lead to toxic shock syndrome (TSS), which can be fatal.
Advertisement
3.
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Chlamydia and gonorrhea are two of the most common STIs associated with dark vaginal discharge, bleeding, or foul-smelling discharge.
Your symptoms can vary, depending on which STI you have, but common symptoms include:
Pain or burning when urinating
Vaginal itching
Spotting or bleeding between periods
Bleeding and pain during or after sex
What to do next: If left untreated, STIs can worsen and may lead to pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) or infertility.
If you have any of the above symptoms, it's best to make an appointment for testing right away.
A healthcare professional can make a diagnosis and prescribe the right treatment.
Treatment for STIs generally includes:
A round of antibiotics or antiviral medications
Abstaining from sex during the treatment period
Testing and preventative treatment, if needed, for your partner(s)
Advertisement
4.
Cervical cancer
Black blood could be a possible sign of cervical cancer, although this type of cancer is less common in the United States.
The blood can appear as spotting between periods, bleeding after menopause, and longer or heavier periods than usual.
With cervical cancer, blood will often appear chunky and have a foul smell.
Cervical cancer often doesn't involve early symptoms, but you could notice:
Itching or burning during urination
Blood in your urine
Pain during sex
What to do next: These symptoms can have a number of causes, so it's always best to make an appointment with your doctor.
They can do a pelvic exam and Pap smear and recommend next steps, depending on your results.
Important: Endometrial cancer, which affects your uterus' inner lining, can involve unusual vaginal bleeding, including very dark or almost black discharge.
You may also experience bloating, abdominal and pelvic pain, or pain during sex.
If you have these symptoms, make an appointment with your doctor.
Advertisement
Insider's takeaway
Black blood may suggest implantation bleeding, which can happen as a sign of conception.
So, if you notice black spotting and haven't had a period, you may want to consider taking a pregnancy test.
You may also notice black blood during your regular menstrual cycle, usually at the beginning or end of your period.
But there's no need for concern — this just means your blood has taken a little longer to leave your uterus.
If you experience a consistent, heavy flow of dark red or almost-black blood, along with symptoms like pain, fever, nausea, or dizziness, you'll want to get medical attention right away.
COVID-19 lockdowns around the world vastly altered people’s lifestyles, activities, and behaviors.
To date, several waves of the COVID-19 pandemic have occurred globally, including in Thailand.
Since the first wave caused the most abrupt changes in personal behaviors and mental stress, the present cross-sectional study was carried out to determine the effects of the lockdown in Thailand on dry-eye symptoms, and their potential risk factors.
Based-on the participants’ responses, 37.2% had been diagnosed with DED by an ophthalmologist.
More than half of the DED participants had a mild severity, indicated by only 1 kind of medication being used and a usage frequency of less than once daily.
Dry-eye symptoms were worst among the young adults, but better in the middle to older age groups.
This study proved that the COVID-19 lockdown exacerbated the dry-eye symptoms of both DED patients and normal subjects aged up to 60.
The correlated risk factors were being female and increased VDT usage.
Viewing habits were significantly altered by the COVID-19 lockdown.
There was an obvious rise in the average daily VDT usage for all purposes.
The number of participants engaging in prolonged VDT usage for entertainment purposes during the lockdown was triple that during pre-lockdown.
Moreover, a quarter of all participants experienced mental health problems during the lockdown.
Having a mental health abnormality was also associated with having more severe dry-eye symptoms.
This community-based survey reflected the dry-eye symptoms of the overall population.
It demonstrated that there was an abundance of people who suffered with dry-eye symptoms but were not seeking medical care or were unaware of the importance of DED treatment and prevention.
Surprisingly, this study revealed a shift in that the younger adults reported having more severe dry-eye symptoms than the elderly respondents, especially during the lockdown (Fig. 2).
Also, the prevalence of DED was relatively high in participants aged 31–40 years (51% of them had a diagnosis of DED).
This result contrasted with those of other studies, which showed that DED prevalence increased with age and mostly affected women23,33.
However, the epidemiology report of TFOS DEWS II (Tear Film and Ocular Surface Society Dry Eye Workshop II) declared that relatively high DED prevalence rates were present in younger people and school children34.
Nowadays, the rise in VDT usage might be affecting DED prevalence10,24, especially during COVID-19 outbreaks when work-from-home and lockdown measures are instituted.
This study identified that younger adults were exposed to VDTs longer than the elderly in both the normal and lockdown situations (Table 2) as there was a negative correlation between age and VDT usage.
A rise in VDT usage was noticeably associated with worsened dry-eye symptoms, regardless of the presence of DED, which resulted in a lower DESS for the younger adults than the elderly respondents.
This implies that the negative impact of VDT usage, as an external factor, could even overcome the internal risk factors of DED.
Therefore, DED could eventually cause a bigger problem than we are presently experiencing.
The change in lifestyles and viewing habits of the new generation could progressively increase the prevalence of DED.
This would place a sizeable burden on national economies, health care systems, and workplace productivity.
The overall dry-eye symptoms were worse during the lockdown than in the normal situation.
However, there was no statistical difference in the degree of reduction in the DESS of the DED and non-DED groups during the lockdown.
This might be because most of our DED participants had only a mild degree of the disease.
Alternatively, it might be that the potential risk factors during the lockdown (for instance, VDT usage8,9, lower indoor humidity35,36, and more mental health problems16,17) affected both groups equally.
Interestingly, while young to middle-aged adults suffered from a worsening of dry-eye symptoms during the lockdown, only the participants older than 60 showed no significant change.
This result can be supported by the observation that during the COVID-19 lockdown, the lifestyles of mostly retired participants were not as altered as much as those of the younger ones.
During both the normal and the lockdown situation, elderly Thais would typically spend most of their time indoors, away from sunlight, smoke, and wind.
Even though there was an overall rise in daily VDT exposure among the elderly participants, the increment in VDT usage was still only half as much as that of the younger viewers.
Further studies on behavioral changes during the lockdown of elderly people would be required to confirm this hypothesis.
In the univariate analysis, several risk factors were found to be correlated with the worsening of the dry-eye symptoms during the lockdown.
However, the multivariate analysis identified only 2 independent risk factors: greater VDT usage, and the female gender.
During the lockdown, people mostly stayed indoors and spent more time using digital devices5,6.
Home confinement and limited access to public spaces led to a markedly diminished engagement in physical activities.
In a recent paper, Saldanha et al.37 reported that the daily screen time during the pandemic doubled.
The participants in that investigation also suffered with dry-eye symptoms, which eventually led to a reduction in their work efficiency37.
The findings were consistent with that of a European survey, which reported that increased screen time was significantly associated with worsening dry-eye symptoms in DED respondents38.
Although previous research predominantly focused on overall VDT exposure during the lockdown, our results revealed details about the purposes of the daily VDT usage.
This study confirmed that the overall VDT exposure was greater during the lockdown.
The prolonging of the VDT usage was chiefly attributed by our respondents to their work or study needs.
Surprisingly, the number of people who binge-watched TV series, video logs, and movies was 3 times higher than normal.
This might be a consequence of their limited access to other entertainment activities and public areas.
Moreover, the rise in VDT usage was greatly associated with a deterioration in dry-eye symptoms.
This finding is consistent with work by Uchino et al.10, which suggested that prolonged VDT usage shortened the tear break-up time and significantly increased the risk of DED.
Other studies hypothesized that longer blinking intervals that were experienced while focusing on VDTs contributed to an acceleration of tear evaporation and eventually led to DED10,39,40.
Female gender is a well-known risk factor for DED.
Women are disproportionately susceptible to DED, and they tend to experience more severe symptoms than men21,22,23.
Sex hormones have an abundant impact on tear and lipid production as well as the immune system, which plays a major role in DED41. DED in females is related to their low androgen and high estrogen levels, relative to males.
Therefore, as women are predisposed to having more severe dry-eye symptoms, exposure to aggravating conditions might produce worse symptoms in women than in men.
Social distancing and avoiding mass gatherings limited physical interactions between family members, friends, and colleagues.
Moreover, restrictions on access to public areas like gymnasiums, fitness centers, and parks decreased the level of physical activity by the overall population.
The distress caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, isolation measures, and sedentary lifestyles, contributed to an excess of mental health problems3,6,11.
Our study found that 25.7% of the participants had developed mental health abnormalities.
The prevalence was similar to those of other studies, which reported values ranging from 11 to 43.7%11,12,42.
Furthermore, the current investigation revealed that having mental health problems correlated with having more severe dry-eye symptoms (a DESS of less than 75) during the lockdown.
According to a recent European survey report, increased mental stress and poor sleep quality were listed in the top three most common causes of worsening DED symptoms during the lockdown38.
This result was consistent with studies which had found an association between psychiatric problems and DED15,16,17,18,19,20.
The reason is that the perception of dry-eye symptoms was influenced by several psychological traits, such as anxiety and depression43,44.
The study’s strength is that it provided a large-scale, community-based survey which assessed not only patients seeking medical care but also members of the general population.
Moreover, the research assessed a broad range of potential risk factors for dry-eye symptoms that might be affected by the lockdown.
Only a few reports revealed that the impact of a lockdown aggravated DED symptoms through excessive VDT use37,45.
One of the limitations of this study is that it relied on self-reported online survey, distributing the questionnaire via social media may result in sampling bias.
The survey's accessibility was influenced by factors such as the use of screen-based devices and social media accounts.
Another disadvantage was the lack of an objective assessment tool to determine the average daily VDT usage.
As well, weekday and weekend usage might vary greatly in terms of purpose and time.
This limitation should be considered during the conduct of a further study.
Also, the symptoms of dry eye surveyed are nonspecific and can be attributable to other ocular surface diseases such as allergic conjunctivitis, exposure keratopathy, ocular rosacea, blepharitis and episcleritis.
Finally, it might be challenging to use a question to ascertain whether there had been a previous ophthalmologic diagnosis of DED in order to assess the prevalence of the disease.
This is because the criteria for the clinical diagnoses might have differed among the clinicians concerned.
Unfortunately, objective evaluations of DED could not be employed for the present research due to the social distancing measures in force during the pandemic.
The lockdown measures implemented to curb the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic abruptly altered the way of living and established a new normal.
The social isolation measures restricted individuals’ ability to interact with one another.
This resulted in an increased usage of VDTs and frequently excessive exposure to digital devices.
These behavioral changes during the lockdown deteriorated dry-eye symptoms, and they possibly led to an increase in the DED incidence.
INTERVIEW BY CARLY KEMPLER
Global reports show that a third of people who had COVID-19 experience lingering symptoms or new chronic health problems—some as long as a year after their initial infection.
There’s still much to be learned about this population, informally called “long-haulers,” including specific risk factors for and possible causes of this condition.
Epidemiologist Priya Duggal, PhD ’03, MPH ’98, is studying Post-Acute Sequelae of COVID-19, commonly known as long COVID, through the Johns Hopkins COVID Long Study.
In this Q&A, Duggal discusses what we know—and still need to learn about this health condition.
What exactly is long COVID?
What are the symptoms?
With many infectious diseases, you have an acute phase, which is the initial phase where individuals may recover or resolve their infection, or they may go on to severe infections and potentially death.
There’s also what we call the chronic state of infection, and that's what we're starting to see emerge in very large numbers for COVID.
These are individuals who have post-acute sequelae (or symptoms) 30 days or more after their initial infection.
The symptoms we’re seeing with long COVID include things like loss of taste or smell, but also brain fog or an inability to concentrate.
We also have individuals with new heart conditions, new kidney conditions, and, most prevalent, individuals who have excessive fatigue and difficulty breathing.
What do we know about those who experience symptoms associated with long COVID and the risk for developing it?
We’re seeing long COVID across the age spectrum.
What’s really interesting and devastating is that we're seeing it develop among people who were mildly infected, moderately infected, and in some reported cases, those who were previously asymptomatic, as well as those who were hospitalized.
Some studies indicate that long COVID is a bit more prevalent in younger individuals—people in their 30s, 40s, and 50s.
We see that younger women versus younger men seem to be reporting more long-haul symptoms, though it’s unclear if this is a reporting issue or if there’s actually a difference between the two.
At this point, we don’t know if there’s a higher risk for developing symptoms based on race or comorbidities.
Until we get a handle on who’s at risk for long COVID, it’s going to be difficult for us to understand who we should be treating.
How prevalent is long COVID?
Global reports indicate about 20-30% of individuals who were infected with COVID-19 are reporting symptoms more than 30 days post-infection.
These include several reports of symptoms three to six months post-infection and reports of long-term symptoms one year after infection.
What do we know right now about the effectiveness of vaccines in preventing long COVID?
It’s a little too early to tell.
What we do know is that individuals who are vaccinated are less likely to get an infection (or reinfection).
However, there are some COVID infections occurring post-vaccine.
Although the number isn’t reportedly large, we are hearing that those individuals who have these “breakthrough infections” can experience the traditional symptoms of COVID.
Given that they can have those symptoms, however mild they may be, it’s likely that they can also go on to long COVID.
However, since we don’t know how or why long COVID affects certain individuals, it’s difficult to predict.
At this time we believe [that] if you can have those symptoms post-vaccine, then you could potentially go on to have long-term symptoms.
Can vaccines alleviate symptoms of long COVID?
There were some anecdotal reports of people with long COVID who were vaccinated and [then] their symptoms resolved (and others who were vaccinated and nothing changed).
Some scientific groups are working on this question by checking the blood of those with long COVID pre- and post-vaccine.
If the vaccine does resolve symptoms for some people, it may help us to understand why some people have long-term symptoms and maybe their bodies need that immune system boost that the vaccine provides.
But it’s all speculation at this time.
We are trying to quantify how many people may have symptoms resolved after vaccination in our survey to see if this is common or perhaps just some rare reports.
Are we seeing reports of long COVID in children and adolescents?
There are symptoms of long COVID in children and adolescents.
Their symptoms are different from what we're seeing in adults, but just like with other infections, children can get an acute phase and they can get a chronic phase.
The reported primary symptoms seem to be excess fatigue and an inability for them to do some of their daily tasks.
Are the features of long COVID different from symptoms of other post-viral syndromes or chronic fatigue syndrome?
I don’t think it necessarily represents what we see in chronic fatigue syndrome, but there are some similarities.
What perhaps is unique about long COVID and is especially apparent is that many different organ systems are affected.
For example, some people are reporting specific heart issues, and others are reporting difficulty breathing, or dyspnea, and that has a lot to do with the lungs specifically being affected.
But there isn't one classic set of symptoms that all of the long-haulers are expressing.
We hope that what we learn from long COVID aids the chronic fatigue community, which has faced numerous struggles with the clinical community to even get recognition of their symptoms.
We can learn from this, and we can hopefully provide the necessary estimates on the number of those affected and start to define this disease, as well as conduct rigorous research to evaluate potential risk factors and mediating factors.
Long-haulers have real symptoms, and it is imperative that our focus be twofold—on the acute phase of the infection that may result in hospitalization and death, and also on those who have persistent or chronic long-term symptoms.
Carly Kempler is the media and audience engagement specialist for the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
RELATED CONTENT
Even as the Covid-19 pandemic has become a thing of the past for most of us, health surveillance teams and scientists have kept an eye out for how the virus is changing.
A new, highly mutated variant BA.2.86, referred to as Pirola, has got the attention of health agencies worldwide.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has reported only 21 cases of Pirola globally till August end.
However, it was designated as a variant under monitoring because of more than 30 mutations it carries on the critical spike protein — the protein that attaches with receptors on human cells to enter the body.
While the health agencies are trying to determine the impact of these variants on the spread and severity of the disease, doctors say that there are very few cases of Covid-19 reported from the country at the moment and most are getting better on their own just like other viral illnesses.
What do we know about Pirola?
Not much, other than the fact that it carries a high number of mutations.
The health agencies from the United States as well as the United Kingdom — both of which have reported a few cases of Pirola — have said that the numbers are too little to determine whether the variant can spread faster or cause more severe disease.
Advertisement
The US CDC (Centers for Disease Control) says that the detection of the highly mutated variants across several countries shows some degree of transmissibility.
This is at odds with such highly mutated variants so far, which were not really transmitting but being detected in people with compromised immune system in one place.
What are the symptoms that you should watch out for?
While there have been very few cases of Pirola detected worldwide, severe disease and death has not been associated with it.
The UK, in a recent assessment of the variant, said that one person was mildly unwell, one person was symptomatic, and one person did not have any respiratory symptoms.
“To date, no deaths have been reported to WHO among the cases detected with BA.2.86,” the agency said in its latest Covid-19 update, which showed an uptick in the number of cases worldwide as compared to the previous week.
The number of deaths due to Covid-19 has remained low.
Advertisement
While India has not reported any case of Pirola, doctors say that the symptoms are likely to remain the same as most Covid-19 variants — fever, cough and cold.
What is the trend of Covid-19 cases in India?
The number of cases has remained low in the country, with doctors reporting that most of them are mild.
India reported just 18 cases of the infection in the previous 24 hours, with the highest numbers coming from Maharashtra, which accounts for over 200 of the 500 active cases in the country at present.
Dr Rommel Tickoo, director of internal medicine at Max Healthcare, said: “We see one-off Covid-19 cases at the moment.
There are people who come in with flu or flu-like symptoms, but we are not testing them because most of them are getting better on their own.
Some people are admitted with pneumonia but when we test them they do not have Covid-19.”
Advertisement
Who is at risk?
And how should one protect oneself?
Dr Tickoo says no matter the variant, the ways to remain protected are the same.
People who are old, have co-morbidities, continue to be at highest risk of severe disease.
And frequent hand washing and wearing a mask in crowded areas will protect one from not just Covid-19 but also other respiratory infections including the flu.
“If someone has fever and respiratory symptoms, they should avoid stepping out.
If they have to, they should wear a mask.
And people who are at higher risk of severe disease should also put on a mask when going to crowded areas,” he said.
This is especially important for the approaching festive season.
EastEnders and Carry On legend Dame Barbara Windsor has died, aged 83.
Dame Barbara was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s in 2014, and her husband Scott Mitchell revealed her battle to the public four years later.
He told The Sun in May 2018: “Firstly, I hope speaking out will help other families dealing with loved ones who have this cruel disease.
“Secondly, I want the public to know because they are naturally very drawn to Barb­ara and she loves talking to them.
“So rather than me living in fear she might get confused or upset, they’ll know that if her behaviour seems strange, it’s due to Alzhei­mer’s and accept it for what it is.”
Dame Barbara played Peggy Mitchell on EastEnders (Photo: Reuters)
What is Alzheimer’s disease?
There are more than 850,000 people living with dementia in the UK today.
It is estimated that the number of people affected by it by 2025 will rise to over one million.
The word dementia describes a set of symptoms that can include memory loss and difficulties with thinking, problem-solving or language, according to The Alzheimer’s Society.
These symptoms occur when the brain is damaged.
During the course of the disease, proteins build up in the brain to form structures called “plaques” and “tangles”.
This leads to the loss of connections between nerve cells, and eventually to the death of nerve cells and loss of brain tissue.
People with Alzheimer’s also have a shortage of some important chemicals that help to transmit signals around the brain.
What are the early signs?
In the early stages, the main symptom of Alzheimer’s disease is memory lapses, according to NHS Choices.
For example, someone with early Alzheimer’s disease may:
Forget about recent conversations or events, or misplace items.
Forget the names of places and objects, or have trouble thinking of the right word.
Repeat themselves regularly, such as asking the same question several times.
Show poor judgement or find it harder to make decisions.
Become less flexible and more hesitant to try new things.
Develop mood changes, such as increasing anxiety or agitation, or periods of confusion.
The rate at which the symptoms progress is different for each individual and it’s not possible to predict exactly how quickly it will get worse.
Dame Barbara met with Boris Johnson to discuss the disease last year (Photo: PA)
Can you die from Alzheimer’s?
People with Alzheimer’s disease can live for several years after they start to develop symptoms.
It is a life-limiting illness, although many people diagnosed with the condition will die from another cause.
As Alzheimer’s is a progressive neurological condition, it can cause problems with swallowing.
This can lead to aspiration (food being inhaled into the lungs), which can cause frequent chest infections, the NHS says.
It’s also common for people with Alzheimer’s disease to eventually have difficulty eating and have a reduced appetite.
Treatments for Alzheimer’s
Currently, there’s no cure for Alzheimer’s disease, although medication can temporarily reduce some symptoms or slow down the progression of the condition in some people.
Combating the illness has proved one of the greatest modern medical challenges as, after decades of research, scientists have have failed to find any effective treatment.
The major problem is that most Alzheimer’s patients are diagnosed once symptoms such as memory loss begin, and by that time the amyloid plaques have been growing undetected for a long time and the damage is done.
Research suggests this process starts decades before symptoms appear and experts argue screening for the disease should start at middle-age so treatment can begin sooner.
When Jessica Grib of St. Louis was about 32 weeks pregnant with her second child, her blood pressure started rising.
At the time, the then-30-year-old thought little of it.
“I wasn’t really concerned,” Grib, now 36, told TODAY.
“I didn’t think that anything was going to happen.”
Her doctor prescribed her medication, but her blood pressure didn’t lower.
Even bed rest did little to help.
After delivering the baby, Grib went into cardiac arrest.
She learned she had peripartum cardiomyopathy, a type of heart failure or weakness of the heart muscle that occurs at the end of pregnancy or within the first five months of delivery, Grib's doctor, Dr. Kathryn Lindley, director of the Women’s Health Center at Vanderbilt University, told TODAY.
The rare condition can be hard to detect because it mimics pregnancy symptoms, according to the American Heart Association.
“(I) want to raise awareness about this disease,” Grib said.
“I really want people to be comfortable advocating for themselves, to know the signs and symptoms of peripartum cardiomyopathy and heart failure.”
It's been six years since Jessica Grib experienced peripartum cardiomyopathy, and she hopes to raise awareness of the condition that affects people late in pregnancy or in the months after.
Courtesy Jessica Grib
Increasing blood pressure late in pregnancy
When blood pressure medication and bed rest did little to help Grib, her doctor suggested delivering her baby at 37 weeks.
She agreed.
At the last minute, the baby, Amelia, turned breech, and doctors needed to perform a cesarean section.
As Grib lay in the recovery room, she started crashing.
As staff tried to bring her to the cardiac catheterization lab, a room with diagnostic equipment that can generate images of the heart, she needed CPR for 10 minutes.
“It was very obvious that I was having a heart event," Grib explained.
"One of the nurses was a new father himself, and his whole mantra was, ‘We’re not going to lose her.’”
Doctors implanted an Impella heart pump, and she was later transferred to another hospital, where she was placed on ECMO, a type of life-support machine that works like external heart and lungs, according to the American Thoracic Society.
The two devices worked together to support her while her heart recovered.
“I was basically on maximal life support hours after my daughter was born,” Grib said.
“They definitely had no idea what was happening with me.”
For two weeks, Grib was sedated on life support and couldn’t see her daughter.
Her husband split his time between two hospitals in St. Louis.
When Grib woke, she finally met her daughter.
“Meeting her was very emotional,” Grib said.
“We had a photographer come in and capture that moment.
… I really love and hate those pictures at the same time.”
Jessica Grib experienced heart failure during her second pregnancy, and she had a tumor removed that likely contributed to it.
After years with stable health, she felt comfortable to get pregnant again and has had no problems in her third and fourth pregnancies.
Courtesy Shore Shooters Beach Photography
Three weeks after Amelia’s birth, Grib went home.
“I was sure that I was just going to go home and die.
Honestly, I thought I was going to have a stroke or that I was going to bleed out because my blood pressure was still sky high.
My heart rate was off the charts,” she said.
“Miraculously I did not.”
Doctors later discovered Grib had a rare tumor called a paraganglioma, which grows outside the adrenal glands on top of the kidneys, that contributed to her heart failure.
This tumor is extremely rare, occurring in two out of 1 million people, according to the National Cancer Institute.
“Dr. Lindley was the one that identified the tumor," Grib said.
"She thought it was like her Hail Mary.
She said, ‘I’ve heard of this.
I’ve never actually seen it in a person before.'
She’s like, ‘This is just my last shot of figuring out what’s going on with you.’”
In December 2016, Grib had the tumor removed.
Peripartum cardiomyopathy
Peripartum cardiomyopathy occurs in people where there isn't another obvious explanation for their weak heart muscles, Lindley told TODAY.
She added that in the U.S. it affects about one in 2,000 women, though it's more common in other countries.
“There seem to be some environmental and other genetic factors that seem to contribute to the frequency of the disease,” she explained.
“There’s a lot we don’t understand about it.”
When Jessica Grib was pregnant with daughter Amelia, she thought little of her elevated blood pressure.
She was 30 and did not realize that it could be a sign of a type of heart failure that occurs in pregnancy.
Courtesy Jessica Grib
The symptoms of peripartum cardiomyopathy can be similar to what many experience in late pregnancy, making it difficult to know when there is a problem.
Lindley said symptoms include:
Shortness of breath
Excessive swelling
Swelling that worsens after delivery
A new cough without symptoms of a cold or infection, which can be a sign of fluid in the lungs and needs medical attention
Lindley said some people are at greater risk, including:
People over the age of 35
People who've had multiple babies
People with family history of heart failure
People with chronic high blood pressure
People with a history of preeclampsia
Black women
While the condition may sound devastating given that it's a type of heart failure, people do overcome it.
“The good news is that the majority of people will have either recovery of their heart function or at least improvement of their heart function over time,” Lindley said.
“Heart failure means that the heart is not able to appropriately keep up with the demands of the body.
… it doesn’t mean that it’s an irreversible problem.”
Raising awareness
Since having her tumor removed, Grib has regular monitoring to make sure it hasn’t grown back.
These types of tumors are most likely to return within the first five years, Grib's surgeon told her, and fortunately, she passed that five-year anniversary in December 2021.
Still, she continues to undergo bloodwork and scans.
After several years of stable health, Grib and her husband decided to have more children, and she’s now pregnant with her fourth.
She's not considered high risk either because a tumor caused her previous heart failure, and she's now tumor-free.
Except for an extra echocardiogram and a blood test, her pregnancy doesn't require different care.
Grib wants pregnant people to know peripartum cardiomyopathy exists and to consult their doctors if they experience any symptoms.
For two weeks, Jessica Grib was on life support after experiencing peripartum cardiomyopathy and couldn't meet her newborn baby.
They took pictures when they did meet, which she both "loves and hates."
Courtesy Katie Gaeta Photography
“I hope that women are comfortable with advocating for themselves,” she said.
“We want to raise awareness of (peripartum cardiomyopathy) and what people can do to help advocate for themselves.
Like I said, the symptoms can be masked as pregnancy.”
hMSCs require higher concentration of 22-HC for differentiation into neuronal cells
A higher dose of 22-HC is required to differentiate hMSCs into DAergic neuronal cells.
As per the previously reported dose of 22-HC (0.5 μM–1.0 μM) with hESC lines5, maximum neurogenic effect was observed at a concentration of 0.5 µM of 22-HC.
We titrated the dose of 22-HC on BM-MSC from a range of 0.5–3.0 µM and evaluated the results by flow cytometric enumeration of MAP2 and TH-positive cells to use 2 µM of 22-HC for further experiments.
22-HC causes neuron-like morphological changes in the hMSCs
Morphological changes were observed after treating hMSCs
with 22-HC and FGF2.
Spindle-shaped morphology of MSCs changed to more neuronal one with distinct cell body, perikaryl nucleus and cytoplasmic extensions like neurites and axon.
The terminals of the induced cells also had multiple dendritic structures (Fig. 1.1), as confirmed by scanning electron microscopic (SEM) studies.
Several fields showed cell to cell interaction, with extended neurites like extensions.
Axon-hillock-like structures were also observed in the differentiated neuronal cells (Fig. 1.2 A i and ii).
Fig. 1: 1: Morphological changes occurring in hMSCs during various time points (day 3, day 5, day 10 and day 12) of neuronal induction.
(i) BM-MSC, (ii) AD-MSC and (iii) DP-MSC.
The morphology of hMSCs has changed from spindle shaped to perikaryl.
Appearance of neuronal morphology starts appearing from 6 to 7th day of induction (scale bar 100 µm).
2: Morphological and Morphometric Characterization of differentiated hMSCs: A Scanning electron microscopic observations depicting minute morphological changes occurring in hMSCs
after neuronal induction (i) morphology of hMSCs has changed from spindle shaped to perikaryl.
Terminals of the cells show appearance of minute neurites’-like structures, which enhance cell-cell interactions.
Here, # denotes neuritis, *denotes cell body and •denotes axon hillock (Scale bar 20 μm).
(ii) magnified images of differentiated cells, showing the appearance of axon-hillock, neuritogenesis and appearance of terminal neurites, facilitating cellular responses and interactions (Scale bar 2 μm).
B Morphometric analysis of the neuronal cells generated in vitro by using 22-HC (i) area of the cell body under various study groups.
The graph depicts significant difference in this parameter between AD-MSC and DP-MSC; (ii) average length of neurites of differentiated cells after induction.
The graph shows that the difference in the length of neurites is significantly higher in differentiated DP-MSCs, as compared to that in BM-MSCs and AD-MSCs; (iii) length of axons of cells after neuronal induction.
The graph shows that the difference in the axonal length follows similar trend as average length of neurites; (iv) ratio of axon to cell body of cells under various study groups.
The graph depicts that this morphological parameter of neuronal cells shows significant difference among all the three types of hMSCs under the study.
Data points represent the means ± SD (n = 3), *p < 0.001 vs. control untreated cells.
For all the parameters under the study, five different samples of each type of hMSC were taken (n = 40 for each study group).
Data was analysed by three independent observers.
Full size image
22-HC induces neuronal cells-like features in hMSCs
with increase in the average area of cell body, length of neurites and axon
Average of the cell body increased from 38.51 ± 0.8 to 1737 ± 116.3 µm2 in BM-MSCs, from 43.03 ± 3.0 to 1897 ± 130.1 µm2 in AD-MSCs and from 37.85 ± 1.5 to 2430 ± 119.7 µm2 in DP-MSCs.
Average length of the neurites increased from 57.59 ± 11.4 to 129.1 ± 6.2 µm in BM-MSCs, from 61.49 ± 6.7 to 128.7 ± 5.5 µm in AD-MSCs and from 75.26 ± 10.9 to 199.8 ± 13.5 µm in DP-MSCs.
An upsurge from 57.59 ± 11.4 to 191.8 ± 16 µm in BM-MSCs, from 49.09 ± 6.9 to 278.5 ± 10.4 µm in AD-MSCs and from 75.26 ± 10.9 to 390.5 ± 25 µm in DP-MSCs was observed with axon length.
No significant difference was found in the area of cell body and average length of neurites of induced BM-MSCs and AD-MSCs.
On the contrary, length of axon and ratio of axon to cell body was found to be significantly higher in induced AD-MSCs as compared to those in induced BM-MSCs.
DP-MSCs consistently had higher escalation in all the studied parameters (Fig. 1.2 B i–iv).
22-HC leads to upregulation of DA neuronal cell traits at transcriptional level in hMSCs
Post induction, a relative upregulation was observed in the expression of NF (3.16 ± 0.2, 3.3 ± 0.4 and 29.6 ± 1.3 folds in BM-MSCs, AD-MSCs and DP-MSCs, respectively), TUJ1 (3.1 ± 0.2, 10.9 ± 0.5 and 18.06 ± 0.6 folds in BM-MSCs, AD-MSCs and DP-MSCs, respectively), MAP2 (4.07 ± 0.45, 9.07 ± 0.68 and 35.3 ± 0.90 folds in BM-MSCs, AD-MSCs and DP-MSCs, respectively) and TH (32.6 ± 1.7, 7.8 ± 0.8 and 41.6 ± 0.7 folds in BM-MSCs, AD-MSCs and DP-MSCs, respectively).
However, no significantincrease was observed in mRNA expression of nestin, except that in DP-MSCs with 1.3 ± 0.2 folds (Fig. 2).
Mature neuronal markers, TUJ1 and MAP2 followed a similar trend, with significantly higher upregulation in AD-MSCs as compared to that in BM-MSCs.
Fig.
2: qRT-PCR transcriptional analysis of differentiated hMSCs.
(i) Relative fold change in mRNA expression of nestin in induced hMSCs, as compared to respective uninduced counterparts; (ii) relative fold change in mRNA expression NF in induced hMSCs, as compared to respective uninduced counterparts; (iii) relative fold change in mRNA expression of TUJ1 in induced hMSCs, as compared to respective uninduced counterparts; (iv) relative fold change in mRNA expression of MAP2 in induced hMSCs, as compared to respective uninduced counterparts; (v) relative fold change in mRNA expression of TH in induced hMSCs, as compared to respective uninduced counterparts.
Data points represent the means ± SD (n = 3), *p < 0.001 vs. control untreated cells.
Full size image
22-HC causes increase in the DA neuronal cell-specific proteins, corresponding to their transcriptional expression
There was only basal level of expression of MAP2 and TH in uninduced hMSCs, while a higher expression was observed post-induction in all the hMSC types (Fig. 3).
Increased fluorescence intensity in the images supports higher expression of MAP2 and TH in differentiated cells.
However, among the various hMSCs types, the highest fluorescence intensity of these protein markers was observed in case of DP-MSC.
Similar trend was also observed when immunoblotting assay was performed in both uninduced and induced groups (Fig. 3).
Fig.
3: Expression of neuronal cell-associated proteins in differentiated hMSCs.
A Immunoflorescence assay showing expression of nestin, MAP2 and TH protein expression in hMSCs pre-differentiation and post-differentiation into DAergic neuronal cells.
B Immunoblotting assay for expression of neuronal and DA neuronal cells associated proteins (MAP2 and TH) in uninduced and differentiated hMSCs.
Full size image
Induction of hMSCs using 22-HC increases the percentage of cells positive for DAergic neuronal proteins
Except in BM-MSCs, nestin-positive cells were increased upon differentiation (from 9.4 ± 0.9% to 15.1 ± 0.5% in AD-MSCs and from 17.8 ± 0.5% to 23 ± 1.1% in DP-MSCs).
MAP2-positive cells were significantly increased post induction in all hMSC types.
Maximum increase was observed in DP-MSCs (80.20 ± 1.5%), followed by that in BM-MSCs (67.3 ± 1.5%) and AD-MSCs (60.1 ± 0.9%)
(Fig. 4A (i) and (ii)).
No marked difference was observed in the percentage of cells positive for TH between BM-MSCs and DP-MSCs post-neuronal induction (56.9 ± 4.0% and 62.3 ± 4.5%, respectively) (Fig. 4A (iii)).
Fig. 4: Flow cytometric analysis for cell enumeration.
A (i) Graph depicting the number of nestin-positive cells pre-neuronal and post-neuronal induction.
DP-MSC have maximum number of nestin positive (p*), cells at the beginning of experiments, followed by those in AD-MSC and BM-MSC; (ii) graph depicting the number of MAP2-positive cells pre- and post-neuronal induction.
(p*); (iii) graph depicting the number of TH-positive cells pre- and post-neuronal induction.
Data points represent the means ± SD (n = 3), *p < 0.001 vs. control untreated cells.
B Flow cytometric analysis for cell enumeration of non-DAergic neuronal cells in the cell-milieu, pre-neuronal and post-neuronal differentiation of hMSCs.
Full size image
Cell milieu of the induced hMSCs: presence of non-DA neuronal cells
Cell milieu of the induced hMSCs consisted of cells positive for non-DAergic proteins like TPH2, S100, GFAP and Ach.
The percentage of TPH2 increased significantly in BM-MSC and DP-MSCs only; while it decreased in AD-MSCs (however non-significantly).
Similar trend was observed with Ach-positive cells.
However, cells positive for S100 increased only in DP-MSCs post-induction (Fig. 4B).
Upregulation of the gene expression of transcription factors responsible for maturation and survival of DAergic neurons
22-HC also increased the expression of transcription factors, which are responsible for maturation and survival of DAergic neurons12.
While BM-MSCs and AD-MSCs showed no significant difference in the expression of PitX3, yet remarkable increase in the expression of NGN2 in BM-MSCs (10.6 ± 0.6 folds) as compared to those in AD-MSCs (8.3 ± 0.3 folds) was seen.
Whereas, DP-MSCs maintained the trend with highest increase in gene expression (13.75 ± 0.6 folds of PitX3 and 15.3 ± 0.4 folds of NGN2 in BM-MSCs, AD-MSCs and DP-MSCs, respectively).
These results show that the differentiated hMSCs expressed prototypical midbrain DAergic markers at transcriptional level (Fig. 5A (i) and (ii)).
Fig.
5: Assessment of genes and proteins associated with neuronal functionality.
A qRT-PCR mRNA transcriptional analysis of differentiated hMSCs for genes associated with functional behaviour of DAergic neuronal cells.
Data points represent the means ± SD (n = 3), *p < 0.001 vs. control untreated cells.
B Flow cytometric enumeration of number of cells positive for (i) dopamine transporter protein, a protein responsible for release of dopamine neurotransmitter through vesicles and (ii) synaptophysin protein which is responsible for the formation of synapse between two neuronal cells.
Data points represent the means ± SD (n = 3), *p < 0.001 vs. control untreated cells.
C Immunoflorescence assay to show the expression of TH and DAT proteins in hMSCs pre-differentiation and post-differentiation into DAergic neuronal cells.
Full size image
22-HC improves functional DAergic specifications at both gene and protein levels
A constant trend was observed where maximum increase in the expression of three genes (15.34 ± 0.3 folds DAT, 24.02 ± 0.56 folds Kv4.2 and 20.12 ± 0.63 folds SCN5A) was highest in DP-MSCs, followed by that in BM-MSCs (10.5 ± 0.3 folds DAT, 13.9 ± 1.1 folds Kv4.2 and 13.4 ± 0.7 folds SCN5A) and AD-MSCs (7.8 ± 0.4 folds DAT, 6.9 ± 0.4 folds Kv4.2 and 7.5 ± 0.4 folds SCN5A).
Extent of escalation of these functionality related genes was observed to be significantly lower in differentiated AD-MSCs, as compared to that in other hMSC types (Fig. 5B (iii)–(v)).
The number of cells in differentiated hMSCs positive for DAT and synaptophysin was significantly higher than that in naive MSCs.
While no denoting difference was observed between the outcome of BM-MSCs (40.2 ± 2.0%) and AD-MSCs (43.8 ± 0.9%) for DAT-positive cells, DP-MSCs showed positively higher percentage of DAT-positive cells (50.8 ± 0.9%).
Likewise, synaptophysin-positive cells were found to be highest in number in differentiated DP-MSCs (54.9 ± 3.7%), followed by that in BM-MSCs (33.0 ± 2.7%) and AD-MSCs (22.8 ± 1.1%).
The difference was significant among all the induced cell types (Fig. 5B (i) and (ii)).
Furthermore, immunoflorescence staining revealed the presence of both TH and DAT proteins in all the hMSC types post induction with very little or no expression in naive hMSCs
(Fig. 6C).
Fig.
6: Functional Characterization of hMSCs.
A Transmission electron microscopic observations depicting ultra-structural changes occurring in hMSCs
after neuronal induction.
(i) Ultra-structural composition of hMSCs has changed on various parameters.
There was observed increased mitogenesis, increase in dense core vesicles, rough endoplasmic reticulum, cytoskeletal condensation and endocytotic vesicles.
The genesis of these cellular organelles may be associated with the increased functionality of the terminally differentiated hMSCs.
(ii) Part of the cell membrane showing the release of vesicles (probably synaptic vesicles) by exocytosis, contributing to the chemical functionality of the DAergic neuronal cells.
In this figure, # represent rough endoplasmic reticulum, * represent mitochondria, represent endocytotic vacuoles, • represent cytoskeletal condensation and represent dense core vesicles.
å represent the exocytotic vesicles released from differentiated DP-MSCs.
B Calcium ion imaging analysis by Fura red-AM ratiometric dye: (i) line graphs showing the changes in the Ca2+ transients upon depolarization with KCl in cells of all study groups.
The uninduced hMSC did not show any change in the intracellular Ca2+ concentration after depolarization.
The red arrows indicate the time point of addition of KCl for depolarization in the cell culture; (ii) graph showing the change in the percentage increase in the calcium ion concentration in hMSCs obtained from various tissue sources after DAergic neuronal induction by 22-HC.
Data points represent the means±SD (n=5), *p<0.001 vs. control untreated cells.
C qRT-PCR transcriptional analysis of liver X receptors α and β, which are the main nuclear receptors, reported to date, responsible for DAergic neurogenesis by oxysterols (22-HC).
Our results suggest a prominent role of LXRβ in DAergic neurogenesis with 22-HC as inducer DP-MSC only.
LXRα does not seem to play much distinct role in this process.
However, least upregulation of both of these genes was observed in BM-MSCs.
Full size image
Ultra-structural changes, contributing towards functional DA neuronal cell specification were observed
Neuronal differentiation of hMSCs is associated with the ultra-structural modifications in the mitochondria13, dense core vesicles or granules (DCVs)24, rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER)25, cytoplasmic filamentous condensation25,26 and endocytic vesicles26.
Mitochondrial biogenesis was increased in the differentiated DAergic neuronal cells, as is evident by the increase in the number of mitochondria, with globular cup-like structure and evident cristae.
(Fig. 6A).
The number of DCVs and RER was increased, attributing towards the increased functionality of the neuronal cells, which is an indicative of the increased functionality of the cells (Fig. 6A).
Cytoskeletal condensation is an indicative of neuritogenesis and axonogenesis and was observed in all types of hMSCs post differentiation.
Microtubules were observed to be arranged in a synchronized pattern after differentiation of hMSCs with 22-HC.
Small endocytotic vesicles were also observed in the ultra-structural study of hMSCs post-induction (Fig. 6A).
hMSCs show increase in the calcium ion efflux upon treatment with 22-HC
In DP-MSCs
the change in calcium ion transients was observed to be maximum (58.5 ± 2.6%) as compared to the control (17.9 ± 1.7%).
This was followed by that in AD-MSCs (52.1 ± 1.8% in differentiated and 18.7 ± 1.7% in control) and least calcium ion transients were observed in BM-MSCs (46.98 ± 2.566% in differentiated and 17.5 ± 1.9% in control).
The change in the calcium ion concentration in various study groups have been detailed in Fig.
6B (i) and (ii).
Liver X receptors (α and β) acknowledge 22-HC differently with different types of hMSCs
AD-MSCs showed highest upsurge of LXRα (5.1 ± 0.1 folds), followed by that in DP-MSCs (3.7 ± 0.6 folds), with almost negligible changes in case of BM-MSCs.
On the contrary, LXRβ was maximally expressed in DP-MSCs (6.6 ± 0.9 folds), followed by that in AD-MSCs and BM-MSCs, with negligible upregulation (Fig. 6C).
This difference in the expression of both the receptors in different hMSC types may be attributed to their origin, chief function(s) in the living system and pathway(s) that might have been activated, resulting in DAergic neurogenesis.
Testing the therapeutic effect of hMSCs in Parkinsonian rats: animal work results
The experiments were performed as per the schematic illustration given in Fig.
7.
After surgery, the food and water intake of the rats were monitored and observed, along with any signs of infections.
There was a reduction of food and water intake by the rats, resulting in reduction in a loss of the body weights (data not shown).
However, the reduction was not observed after second week of the surgery.
Fig. 7: Validation of in vitro results in Wistar rat PD models.
A Schematic representation to show the sequence of in vivo stem cell transplantation experiments.
B Balance beam test: restoration of motor deficit function in rats who received either naïve or differentiated hMSCs.
While the motor function in all the rats was reduced significantly after creation of lesion by 6-OHDA, it was reduced further significantly upon hMSCs transplantation, with maximum effect in case of differentiated DP-MSCs.
This test was performed 4 weeks after transplantation of hMSCs.
Data points represent the means±SD (n=5), *p<0.001 vs. control untreated cells.
C Rotarod test: The retention time of the rats was increased significantly after transplanting them with hMSCs in naïve or differentiated form.
However, the restoration of motor neuron function was the most in case where differentiated DP-MSCs were used.
Full size image
After one week of surgery, the rats with more than 60 rotations per 30 min were selected for further experiments, based on the apomorphine test performed.
To further confirm the induction of neurodegeneration on the rats, their behavioural changes were analysed for APO-induced rotation, motor coordination and balance skills after 2 weeks.
Prior to performing behavioural studies, homing of MSCs were ensured by FISH analyses in which the part of rat brain where MSCs were transplanted was taken and processed for X-linked probing for human chromosomes.
Categorically, hMSCs from female donors were used to be transplanted in the male Wistar rats to avoid any false positive results during homing studies.
We observed that there was a presence of X probe positive cells as well as cells which showed absolute absence of any probes, proving that the brain tissue under analysis contained cells of both human and rat origin even after 2 weeks of transplantation (Fig. 8).
Fig. 8: Fluorescent in situ hybridization study.
To investigate the homing of transplanted hMSCs in the SNpc region of Wistar rat brain (scale bar 50 µm); Hematoxylin and eosin staining to check the presence of any inflammatory cells in the SNpc region of Wistar rat brain (scale bar 50 µm); immuno-histochemical analysis to study the differential expression of MAP2 and TH proteins in the SNpc region of Wistar rat brain (scale bar 200 µm).
All these analyses were performed subsequently in all the study groups.
Full size image
Behavioural studies were performed 2 weeks post transplantation of hMSCs.
Rotarod results revealed that the retention time of rats post-surgery reduced significantly from an average of 31–10 s. Coaxed and naïve MSCs (1 × 105 per 4 µL PBS) were transplanted after 2 weeks of lesion surgery.
The retention time increased significantly in all the groups where coaxed hMSCs were transplanted, as compared to their naïve counterpart hMSCs, highest retention time being with coaxed DP-MSCs (~28 s), followed by that in BM-MSCs (~25 s) and AD-MSCs (~21 s), with significant difference.
Similar trend was observed with beam test.
While the time taken to traverse the beam increased post-surgery, it was reduced significantly upon transplanting hMSCs.
As compared to the naïve hMSCs, coaxed hMSCs
yielded significantly better recovery of motor functions in rats.
In compliance with the results of rotarod test, recovery of motor functions was better with DP-MSCs with traverse time of ~12 s, followed by that with AD-MSCs (~17 s) and BM-MSCs (~20 s) (Fig. 7).
Upon careful examination of the sections, it was observed that the presence of inflammatory cells was almost nil in the transplanted region.
Also no prominent signs of necrotic neurons were observed.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that while the expression of MAP2 and TH decreased in the lesion region of rat brain, it increased in the groups where hMSCs were transplanted.
However, the expression of both the proteins was higher in groups transplanted with coaxed hMSCs.
The results with DP-MSCs were corresponding with the previous experiments and observations (Fig. 8).
EARLY SIGNS Runny nose, sore throat and headache should be added as Covid symptoms, docs warn
A RUNNY nose, sore throat and headache should be added to the UK’s official list of Covid symptoms, doctors have said.
GPs say cases of coronavirus are being missed because people think they do not have it, based on the NHS list of symptoms.
🦠 Read our coronavirus live blog for the latest news & updates
5 A runny nose is frequently seen in Covid patients, doctors say Credit: Getty Images - Getty
The NHS say there are three main symptoms of Covid - a high temperature, a new and continuous cough, and a loss of taste and smell.
When booking a test through the Government website, people are told they should have one of these symptoms in order to get a test.
But Dr Alex Sohal, a lecturer in primary care at Queen Mary University of London, says she has to tell patients to lie in order to get a Covid test because they don’t have the three main symptoms.
Writing to the Chief Medical Officer in the British Medical Journal, Dr Sohal describes her experience as a GP in Tower Hamlets with the backing of 140 east London GPs and medics.
She said: “As GPs, we regularly review patients with mild symptoms - for example, a runny or blocked nose, sore throat, hoarseness, myalgia [muscle pain], fatigue, and headache - who subsequently turn out to be Covid-19 positive.
“These symptoms are often inadvertently picked up while dealing with patients’ other more pressing health issues.
“These patients have frequently not even considered that they may have covid-19 and have not self-isolated in the crucial early days when they were most infectious.”
The World Health Organization’s definition of Covid includes a runny nose, sore throat, vomiting, and diarrhoea.
“It is vital to now change the UK covid-19 case definition and test criteria to include coryza and cold, making them consistent with WHO,” Dr Sohal said.
The Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), America’s health agency, also lists these symptoms, as well as officials in Australia and Canada.
Dr Sohal said the public should be told that if they have mild symptoms suggestive of Covid, such as a runny nose, they should not leave the home.
It’s important they do this in the first five days of symptoms when they are most infectious to others.
Dr Sohal concludes: “This will help to get—and keep—us out of this indefinite lockdown, as covid-19 becomes increasingly endemic globally.
Ignoring this will be at our peril.”
5 What are the symptoms of Covid compared with cold, flu and allergies?
The Chief Medical Officer sets the official advice on symptoms, reflected on the NHS website.
For England, this is Professor Chris Whitty.
The Department of Health and Social Care says it has acknowledged that Covid causes a long list of symptoms.
But it chooses to list the main three in order to strike a balance and "capture those most likely to have Covid-19, while not capturing a great number of people who do not".
A spokesperson said: "An expert and independent scientific group keeps the list of symptoms of Covid-19 under constant review as our understanding of the virus continues to evolve.”
RUNNY NOSE "ABSOLUTELY NOT COVID"
Researchers at King’s College London (KCL) have previously said a runny nose is unlikely to be Covid.
They look at the symptoms of millions of people who report to the Covid Symptom Study App to find trends in those with positive test results.
In September, when the reopening of schools and universities caused testing shortages, Prof Tim Spector, an epidemiologist at KCL, said that a runny nose, sneezing and congestion is highly unlikely to be Covid-19.
Speaking to BBC Radio 4's Today programme, he said: "What we are seeing is that if people are particularly worried at the moment about colds or Covid is that if they don't have this combination of symptoms quite severely its highly unlikely that their symptoms are actually related.
"We have to realise that perhaps 98 per cent of all tests done at the moment are negative so many people are getting it wrong.
"We've also shown some negative signs in our app so that if you do have a runny nose or congestion or sneezing that's really a sign that you absolutely do not have Covid.
"
Despite a runny nose not being one of the main symptoms, people should seek professional medical advice about it, such as by calling the NHS 111 coronavirus advice service or their GP.
It may be that you just have a cold, however combined with others symptoms it could be Covid.
The KCL researchers are in agreement that headache and fatigue are among the most common early symptoms of Covid - neither of which are on the NHS website.
A sore throat, loss of appetite, and shortness of breath are also commonly reported.
Again, none of these are listed by the NHS.
5 The most common early symptoms of Covid, according to King's College London and the ZOE Covid Symptom Study app Credit: ZOE Covid Symptom Study app
WHAT ARE THE MOST COMMON COVID SYMPTOMS?
Overall the KCL app has found the most frequent symptoms for adults are fatigue (87 per cent), headache (72 per cent), loss of smell (60 per cent), persistent cough (54 per cent) and a sore throat (49 per cent).
But there are now three new coronavirus strains health officials are concerned about - from Ken, South Africa and Brazil.
Data from the Zoe Symptom Tracker App revealed that there was "no evidence in a change in symptoms" for people who had caught the new Kent variant.
However, data from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) last week revealed that people who caught the Kent variant would have different symptoms to the original strain of the virus.
5 How symptoms compare between the original strain of coronavirus and the Kent one
5
The report stated that people suffering with the Kent mutation are more likely to get a cough, sore throat, tiredness and muscle pain.
The largest change in symptoms between the two strains is people are much less likely to report high temperatures.
The study found no real difference in reports of shortness of breath or headaches from patients with either the novel strain or the mutation.
The NHS list of symptoms has largely remained unchanged over the past year, despite new and emerging evidence.
It added loss/change in taste and smell in May after KCL said there was overwhelming evidence it was a common sign of the disease.
KCL have previously warned “we have struggled to identify every case because of how differently Covid-19 affects people”.
Every month, for about two to three days before my period, I experience terrible brain fog.
It’s similar to the feeling I get when I oversleep: I can’t think as quickly or clearly as I normally can, my memory is a bit fuzzy, and I’m just kind of out of it.
Experts use the term brain fog to describe a range of temporary “cognitive difficulties,” like trouble focusing, forgetfulness, and mild confusion.
Brain fog isn’t a medical diagnosis; rather, it’s a symptom associated with a slew of health conditions, including pregnancy, depression, long COVID, and, yes, PMS (premenstrual syndrome).
The research on PMS-related brain fog is limited, but anecdotally, going through it can be a slog, Jennifer Roelands, MD, an ob-gyn who specializes in holistic medicine, tells SELF.
For example, the mental cloudiness and impaired concentration may hurt your performance at work, as SELF previously reported, and research suggests that PMS symptoms, including cognitive ones like confusion, can also impact personal relationships.
For me, the easiest tasks—like sending an email—suddenly feel difficult, and sometimes I feel like I lack the wherewithal to navigate even simple conversations.
“To deal with that every single month is pretty miserable, but there are definitely things you can do to help,” says Dr. Roelands.
More on that soon, but first…
Why might menstruation trigger brain fog?
I’ve always chalked premenstrual brain fog up to hormonal fluctuations that occur during my cycle.
I figured the mental sludge had something to do with cyclical changes in estrogen and progesterone.
That’s possibly not too far off, according to Dr. Roelands.
Menstruation can cause all sorts of drastic and rapid hormonal changes that are associated with an array of symptoms (a.k.a. PMS), as SELF previously reported.
It’s known that estrogen and progesterone also play a role in brain function and cognition, but how, specifically, changes in those hormones may directly contribute to brain fog is somewhat unclear, Cheruba Prabakar, MD, ob-gyn and chief medical advisor for wellness-ingredient company Purissima, tells SELF.
The evidence has been mixed: A small 2017 study concluded that there is no relationship between brain fog and the hormonal changes that take place leading up to menstruation, while a 2020 analysis suggests that it’s just too early to declare, either way, if and how menstrual-related hormone changes impact cognitive functioning.
Though the research on PMS and brain fog is inconclusive, many reproductive health specialists, including the ones SELF talked to for this story, say that, anecdotally, people commonly report experiencing brain fog both before and during menstruation.
The going theory, according to both Dr. Roelands and Dr. Prabakar: The mentally fuzzy feeling is likely due to all of the significant changes in hormones, neurotransmitters, and insulin levels that happen during your menstrual cycle.
And there are some data that support this theory: Research shows that estrogen and progesterone influence neurotransmitters like dopamine and serotonin that deal with executive functions (a group of complex cognitive abilities that includes working memory and problem solving).
Studies have also linked low estrogen levels to cognitive impairment and higher estrogen levels to improvements in memory and learning.
There are estrogen receptors all over the brain, says Dr. Roelands, so it makes sense why your cognitive function is affected by the estrogen dip that happens during PMS.
Experts also know that cognitive issues are common in menopausal people who have chronically low estrogen levels.
Sign up to our free Living Well email for advice on living a happier, healthier and longer life Live your life healthier and happier with our free weekly Living Well newsletter Please enter a valid email address Please enter a valid email address SIGN UP
I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent.
Read our privacy policy Thanks for signing up to the
Living Well email {{ #verifyErrors }} {{ message }} {{ /verifyErrors }} {{ ^verifyErrors }} Something went wrong.
Please try again later {{ /verifyErrors }}
A mother who felt she was being “eaten away” after hot flushes led to an incurable blood cancer diagnosis in her late 50s has urged women not to ignore symptoms.
In the summer of 2022, Barbara Geraghty-Whitehead, 58, a school inclusion manager who lives in Cheshire, began to experience hot flushes, dizziness and she developed an ear infection.
She said she “put it to the back of (her) mind”, but her symptoms persisted – and eventually, after months of hesitation, she visited her GP in September 2022 and underwent blood tests.
Within a matter of hours, she received a phone call from her doctor, saying that they were concerned about how high her white blood cells were and that they suspected it could be cancer.
One week later, after further tests, Geraghty-Whitehead was told she has chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) and it is incurable.
“You say you want to carry on as much as normal, but from that second nothing else was going to be normal anymore,” she told PA Real Life.
“I wanted to go in and for them to say, ‘No, it was a mistake, it’s something else,’ but they didn’t, they said it was CML.”
Geraghty-Whitehead started taking chemotherapy tablets that same day – and despite experiencing side effects of fatigue, nausea, acid reflux, and a loss of taste, nearly one year later she has responded well to treatment and has been able to see her daughter get married in Cyprus.
After nearly ignoring her own symptoms, she wants to encourage others not to “make excuses”, as “people need to know the signs so they can get diagnosed early”.
“When I was first diagnosed, you don’t know where to start and that in itself is overwhelming, but the support I’ve received has been fantastic,” Geraghty-Whitehead said.
“I think about [my diagnosis] every day and it is hard and I do get upset, but now I’ve just got to face the fact that this is the new me.
“I’m never going to be the person that I was before but I’m going to recreate the new me.”
Geraghty-Whitehead said she almost ignored her cancer symptoms and attributed her hot flushes to warm weather and “thought no more of it”.
She said she did not think it was related to menopause, as she had already been taking hormone replacement therapy (HRT) patches for years to treat her bone pain.
“I started not feeling right
and I couldn’t figure out what it was, but I didn’t do anything about it – I just left it,” she explained.
She added: “I never ever got hot flushes.
Even though I was put on HRT patches, it was mainly for my bone pain, so I just put it to the back of my mind and I thought no more of it.”
Looking back now, she realises she should have acted sooner – but on September 16, she visited her GP and underwent blood tests.
Days later, on the day of the Queen’s funeral, she found herself sat in an empty hospital waiting room, preparing for further blood tests – and by the end of that week, on September 23, Geraghty-Whitehead received the news she has CML and the following minutes felt like “a blur”.
“Everything happened so fast, it was just like a roller-coaster,” she said.
“I think it was worse waiting for the blood test results because I didn’t know what type of cancer it was, whether I was going to live, whether I was going to die.
“But all I wanted was to get the very first tablet into my body, as I felt like I was being eaten away because it was in my blood and your blood travels everywhere.”
Geraghty-Whitehead started treatment the same day she was diagnosed, which she said was the “first positive move”.
Although she was told her CML is incurable, doctors reassured her other patients had responded well to the chemotherapy tablets she needed to take daily, and this gave her hope.
For more information and support, visit Leukaemia Care’s website here: leukaemiacare.org.uk
By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy .
You can opt-out at any time.
Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go.
download the app
Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily.
Read preview
One day about three years ago, I found an intruder in my apartment.
The encounter was shocking, but brief — so I never thought it would affect my life the way it did.
I had believed I was alone and safe at home, but within thirty seconds a man had pushed me to the floor, and I thought I would be raped or killed.
Being nervous after a shock is natural and normal.
What is not normal was the hypervigilance I experienced for months afterward — a sense of immediate danger even when I knew I was safe.
This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers.
Become an Insider and start reading now.
It's one of the numerous symptoms of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), and it turned my life upside down.
Advertisement
I'm mostly ok now.
Years after the incident I talked to Prof. Neil Greenberg, a defense mental health specialist at King's College London, about how the brain works in situations like this, and why some people live with trauma afterward.
We commonly assume that PTSD is just the result of a scary encounter, and mainly affects people in military service.
But as Greenberg told me it can affect people in numerous situations — from reporters working in war zones to healthcare workers — and much more specific factors dictate whether or not you'll experience PTSD.
Here's what happened to me.
An intruder was there the whole time I thought I was alone
I came home from work and locked the door behind me.
I lived alone, and I'm the type to exploit that luxury to the max — which means peeing with the bathroom door open, shedding my bra, and repeatedly asking the cat why she's so fluffy.
I cooked dinner and relaxed into a lazy evening.
Advertisement
I'd just started an HBO drama when I paused it to get something from my bedroom.
On the way there, I heard an unmistakably human sound.
I can't remember what it was — a cough, a shuffle, clothes rustling?
— but it was right there with me.
I stood there a beat.
A dark shape entered the hallway.
Both of us ran for the front door, but he got there first.
He pulled a coat from the hook, threw it over my head, and muzzled me with his hand.
I crumpled like a leaf.
Pressed to the floor with the coat over my head, next to my own front door, was the exact moment I expected to be raped or killed.
The next moments would define whether I lived or died, and I can still feel the place at my waist where I anticipated a knife's point.
Advertisement
I didn't realize it, but I was screaming.
I also didn't realize that he was asking me to stop.
In fact, he was shushing me.
And was telling me he was leaving, but he needed me to stop screaming first.
To this day, it remains the best deal I have been offered in my entire life.
I formed my hands into a prayer, stopped screaming, and he was gone.
Advertisement
I was safe.
But I wouldn't feel that way for a long time
The whole thing took less than 30 seconds.
Aside from a slight bruise on my lip, I was uninjured.
Nothing had been stolen.
I began to think I had escaped unscathed.
Piecing it together, I worked out that he had already been in the apartment when I came home.
It was likely an opportunist would-be thief who found himself in too deep, and I caught him trying to sneak out.
It was at that moment hearing the noise in the hall that a very ancient part of the brain was activated, Greenberg explained to me.
"There's a bit of your brain called the amygdala, which is all to do with threat control," he said.
The amygdala assesses threats without needing conscious thought.
This means that even without knowing why, you are "instantly put on alert" by an unexpected noise, as he put it.
Advertisement
That alert is sent to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex — which deals with emotional processing — and the hippocampus, which is broadly to do with memory.
Both of those parts rifle through your past experiences to figure out if this threat is actually something explainable.
And normally, it is.
"You look over, and it's a twig, or there's a rabbit, or whatever," said Greenberg.
But in my case, there was no good explanation.
"That bit of 'how the world should be' was strongly challenged, because there was a person there when there shouldn't have been," said Greenberg.
In many cases of PTSD, the way these parts of the brain interact is altered by the incident, meaning they don't function normally for some time after.
PTSD UK — a charity set up to help sufferers — emphasizes that the condition isn't a mental illness, but a psychological injury.
Advertisement
While people can go through a scary situation and emerge with nothing more than a healthy sense of caution, some events tip people over the edge into PTSD.
The difference, Greenberg explained, can be in two factors.
"One of the key aspects about traumatic situations is you perceive them as being both threatening and out of control at the same time," he said.
If the front door had been wide open when I got home, I'd have had the chance to investigate the danger from a safe distance — so it would have felt scary but somehow within my control, he explained.
And if the uninvited person had actually been part of a surprise birthday party, it might have made me jump, but it wouldn't have been threatening.
Advertisement
It's the combination of the two that often causes the injury, said Greenberg.
(Note to friends: Do not organize me surprise birthday parties.)
After that, I didn't know how to feel safe
In the days and weeks that followed, I never felt safe alone.
It didn't matter how many new locks I added, or how often my friends helped me check every nook and cranny.
As soon as my back was turned, the guarantee expired, to be replaced by an overwhelming sense of immediate danger.
It was like playing whack-a-mole with my psyche.
Advertisement
I desperately wished for X-ray vision, so I could see through the walls of my apartment and into every room all at once.
Then, I thought, maybe I could relax.
(As long as I didn't sleep.)
Yes, I understood that in a technical point of fact it was impossible for someone to be hiding there.
But the nearest analogy I can give you is this.
I don't know if you've ever thrashed in frustration at the cliche of the teen horror movie, where the characters insist on exploring a haunted house when it's obviously dangerous.
Related stories
Watching, you want to yell at the oblivious teens, because in reality, nobody in their right mind would press on, and they're only doing it because it's a stupid movie and the plot depends on it.
Advertisement
That was my amygdala, which was yelling at me in totally ordinary situations, all the damn time.
This is because what happened made no sense
An intruder had appeared when I felt assured I was alone.
The "impossible" had happened, and I could no longer trust the evidence of my senses.
The fact that he was already there, when I assumed the apartment was empty, set up what Greenberg called "cognitive dissonance.
"
Ordinarily, after a dangerous situation, people have an adaptive response, he said.
The body has been alerted to danger, it's prepared a fight-or-flight response, and you win or lose that encounter.
Advertisement
We then adapt our belief system to account for it.
Dogs sometimes bite, soup can burn your tongue.
But for me, the new belief system was: your apartment sometimes has an intruder hidden in it.
"In this situation, you couldn't make sense of it," he said.
"The brain tries to set up two things: 'This is how the world is, which is safe and I'm in control of it,' versus 'this is actually what happened.
It wasn't safe.
'
"And when you can't reconcile your view of how the world should work with the facts in front of you, you enter cognitive dissonance.
"
I was withdrawn, jumpy, and craved to be alone.
But I couldn't.
The only way to feel at ease was being around other people, but I wasn't exactly feeling sociable.
Advertisement
Normal life disappeared.
Several friends with spare rooms gave me keys to their apartments, and were amazingly supportive and patient.
But when they weren't home, I would have to grab my things and move on.
I organized my entire life around where other people would be.
As an introvert who hates planning, this is basically my personal Bad Place.
I was usually too proud to ask people to stay home so I could feel safe in their apartment, and when they did, I felt like a parasite.
I usually just retreated to the spare room, pretending I was getting the alone time I craved, but feeling like a ghost in someone else's life.
I had no space to cook a meal or choose what to watch on TV.
Doing laundry, getting my work wardrobe together, and feeding my cat were a logistical nightmare.
I felt vulnerable getting to sleep, and was always in different beds, so I was tired and disorientated at work.
Advertisement
Seeking nonexistent relaxation and the company of strangers, I inevitably spent more time in bars.
Wine, supposed to relax me, didn't.
Although I gave it a good try.
If I really felt like I'd outworn my welcome, I would walk the streets in the middle of the night.
Exhausted, I'd often try to go into my apartment, and would stand outside the door to build up the courage.
But it was as though an invisible intruder had moved in, and we couldn't cohabit.
I'd startle easily, and at times I'd be scared even with company.
One time, I had to stop a boyfriend from slicing a watermelon for us, because I couldn't let him handle a knife near me.
We had to leave the flat and go for a walk so I could calm down.
Advertisement
Being 'triggered' is not what most people take it to be
After months of this, I slowly, slowly regained my independence.
The morning I woke up after a whole night alone in my flat was a victory.
But even much later, triggers remain.
I still startle at a strange noise, and during the coronavirus lockdown in the UK I've been checking my apartment several times a day.
One night, some weeks after I felt better and I was staying with my parents, I woke in the night to an inexplicable noise.
While one part of my brain knew it was the cat trying to get out, another part had me convinced: It was happening again.
An intruder was in the house.
Before I was even awake I had thrown myself out of the bedroom window.
Thankfully, there was a roof below.
It was 4 am on a freezing night before New Years' Eve, and my mum was on the point of calling the fire brigade before we figured out how to get me down.
Believe me, I didn't want to be there: but that's how triggers work.
Advertisement
"Triggered" has become a catch-all term in people's lives: a reference for experiencing a strong memory, or an alt-right term in the ongoing culture wars.
It crops up in the title of Donald Trump Jr's book "Triggered: How the Left Thrives on Hate and Wants to Silence Us" as well as a popular conservative podcast.
It's long been used — along with the term "snowflakes" — to mock people calling for warnings on material that could potentially set off a trauma response.
While I get that not every potentially triggering stimulus can be accounted for, people who get genuinely triggered are dealing with something far tougher than a matter of their personal attitude to the world.
And they have absolutely no choice in the matter.
If anything, the person with PTSD is the opposite of a snowflake: They're actively facing down an uncontrollable reaction at all times.
As a form of psychological injury, PTSD can't be chosen, or persuaded not to happen, or toughed out.
Advertisement
"A trigger is something that turns you into a bag of jelly, because you can't stop your anxiety symptoms," said Greenberg.
"You can't stop your body reacting, or your heart pounding like that.
That's what a trigger is.
It takes you back.
It may actually bring flashbacks.
"
For Greenberg, the main misuse of the term is when it's used to describe sensory associations, such as when we say memories are "triggered" by smell.
But in the medical sense, a trigger "makes you unable to function," he said.
It causes physical symptoms such as a racing heart, diarrhea, and sweating over which you have no control.
"The key thing about a trigger is it causes you to be psychologically disturbed by whatever it is that you're experiencing at that time.
"
Advertisement
PTSD throws a lot at you — but one thing is crucial
Many of the things I went through — withdrawal, numbness, jumpiness, emotional unpredictability, having a bleak sense of the future, poor sleep, and of course, the fear of being alone — are among the symptoms of PTSD.
I don't know if they were a result of my ridiculous new lifestyle, or PTSD, because I never sought a formal diagnosis — like many others, I tried to cope without addressing it.
(My conversation with Greenberg did not constitute a diagnosis.)
A primary symptom, Greenberg said, is "re-experiencing" the event through flashbacks or nightmares — which thankfully, rarely happened to me.
This isn't just remembering the event, but genuinely feeling like you're going through it again.
You can find a lot more symptoms here.
Advertisement
What Greenberg recommends is addressing it sooner rather than later.
"The real unfortunate stupidity of the situation is that actually most people do only come and get help once they reach a crisis point — once they've lost their job, or they've lost their relationship, or they've had a loss of self-esteem because of the trauma," he said.
The lesson here is: Be a "snowflake."
Don't tough it out.
Langya virus has been recently identified in a few people in China.
It can cause fever and flu-like symptoms but doesn’t seem to cause severe illness.
It isn’t transmitted from person to person, but it can be similar to more serious viral infections.
Langya virus is a newly identified virus.
So far, only 35 people in China have been confirmed as having the Langya virus.
People with Langya virus experience fever and a variety of other flu-like symptoms.
While some complications have been observed, Langya virus doesn’t appear to cause severe illness.
To date, no deaths have been reported.
This article will take a closer look at what’s known so far about Langya virus symptoms, potential complications, and how the virus may be transmitted.
How is Langya virus transmitted and who’s at risk?
It’s unclear right now exactly how Langya virus is spread.
However, it’s believed to be zoonotic, meaning it’s passed from animals to humans.
So far, the animal in which Langya virus has been most detected is the shrew.
Shrew species have previously been documented to carry other types of viruses, such as some types of hantaviruses.
There’s currently no evidence that Langya virus is spread from person to person.
Most people who’ve contracted the virus work in professions that are more likely to be in contact with wild animals, such as farming.
This suggests that contact with animals carrying the virus may lead to transmission.
Is Langya virus related to more dangerous viruses?
Langya virus is a member of the genus Henipavirus.
Other prominent viruses in this genus are Hendra virus and Nipah virus .
These two viruses are also zoonotic and can cause severe, life threatening respiratory illnesses in humans.
Both viruses may also lead to encephalitis, a swelling of the brain.
However, at this time, Langya virus infections do not appear to be as severe as those due to Hendra and Nipah virus.
Was this helpful?
Can the Langya virus cause complications?
Some of the complications that have been reported with Langya virus include: pneumonia
impaired liver function
reduced kidney function A 2022 article notes that there’s currently no data on the severity of these complications and whether they’ve led to hospitalization.
So far, no deaths have been reported due to Langya virus.
How is Langya virus diagnosed and treated?
So far, Langya virus has been diagnosed by sequencing swab samples collected from the throat of people thought to have the virus.
Because we know so little about Langya virus, there’s currently no specific diagnostic criteria for it.
Similar to other henipaviruses that can affect humans, there’s no specific treatment for Langya virus.
Treatment is generally supportive, which involves: getting rest
staying hydrated
using medications to reduce symptoms like fever and aches and pains The antiviral drug ribavirin can help with Hendra and Nipah virus infections.
However, it’s not yet known if this drug will have the same effect with Langya virus.
How can you protect yourself?
Langya virus doesn’t appear to cause serious disease.
Also, very few cases of Langya virus have been reported and, currently, they’re localized to specific regions of China.
However, you can protect yourself from other zoonotic infections by doing a few simple things like: washing your hands frequently with soap and water, especially after being around animals
avoiding unnecessary contact or interaction with wild animals
taking steps to prevent bites from mosquitoes and ticks, which may spread some zoonotic infections Was this helpful?
Every day, Nancy Rawson, associate director and vice president of the Monell Chemical Senses Center, tests her sense of smell.
She thinks a similar device could soon be used to screen people for early infection with coronavirus, which often causes people to lose their sense of smell.
She thinks it would be better than screening for fever at flagging people who should get coronavirus tests.
Read more
Many of us have encountered new pandemic-related checkpoints as we’ve tried to enter a workplace or medical office.
There’s no entry until we pass temperature checks and answer questions about whether we’ve traveled lately or been around anyone with COVID-19.
While probably not completely worthless, these procedures are inherently flawed.
Many people with coronavirus never get a fever, and it is often not one of the earliest symptoms.
The virus is everywhere, and many people don’t know whether they’ve been exposed.
Nancy Rawson, a biologist who is associate director and vice president of the Monell Chemical Senses Center, thinks there could be a better way to flag people who need coronavirus tests: measuring how well they can smell.
Advertisement
A new analysis of coronavirus studies that involved Monell found that 77% of coronavirus patients had complete or partial loss of smell when tested.
Forty-four percent were aware of the symptom without testing.
Loss of sense of smell (along with sore throat) is also one of the earliest symptoms, making it more useful than later symptoms for protecting others from exposure, Rawson said.
“It is one of the earliest symptoms, and it is certainly earlier than fever,” she said.
“Smell loss alone predicts diagnosis better than a fever.”
Taste loss can occur as well, but it is less common and often related to smell loss.
Rawson’s interest in what coronavirus does to the sense of smell — a.k.a. olfaction — goes well beyond its potential for screening.
The pandemic, she said, could leave up to 750,000 Americans unable to smell, and that has major implications for their safety and quality of life.
She has been testing her own sense of smell each evening this month.
She’s participating in a pilot study of a new screening system that she hopes will lead to a large clinical trial.
But the tests also ease her mind about allergy symptoms.
She said a number of studies evaluating smell tests for coronavirus screening are in the works.
The trial Monell hopes will receive funding involves a smell test it developed called Scentinel.
The Philadelphia nonprofit partnered with Scentisphere to create the test, which contains three peel-and-sniff films.
Two have no scent.
The third contains a rotating group of familiar odors like coffee, chocolate, popcorn, and natural gas.
People who take the tests are asked to say which strip (if any) has a scent, rate its intensity, and identify the odor.
Rawson imagines a day when a large employer could add smell tests to its screening.
She thinks the tests would cost about a dollar each.
Monell wants to charge the minimum amount to cover expenses, Rawson said.
People with impaired olfaction would be referred for more expensive coronavirus tests.
Rawson said the mask problem could be solved by quickly lifting the bottom of your mask to smell a strip or asking employees to take the test at home before work.
For those of you who just want to combat anxiety at home, Rawson says plenty of readily available products will do.
Try smelling coffee, perfume, minty toothpaste, basil, rosemary, roses.
Sense of smell can also be impaired in people with Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases, so tests could alert doctors to serious neurodegeneration.
Flu can also cause smell loss, but not as often as COVID-19.
About 60% of flu patients eventually get their sense of smell back.
Rawson expects a similar recovery rate for coronavirus patients.
Permanent impairment is more likely in older people.
While olfaction loss in flu patients seems to be related to inflammation, Rawson said COVID-19 appears to bind directly with ACE2 receptors on “supporting” cells in the nose that help other cells that actually detect odors.
It is too soon to know how that will influence recovery.
Smell may not seem like your most important sense, but Rawson said that losing it can have serious consequences.
She has been so impressed by patient stories that she is advising a new group called the Smell and Taste Association of North America.
She also experienced smell loss herself in March 2019.
She first noticed it when a sip of wine tasted like vinegar during a “devastating” visit to the flower show.
“Every once in a while [I] would get just a little whiff that gave me hope I might recover,” she said.
She did, after about two months.
A new study from JAMA Otolaryngology found that people aged 65 and up with impaired sense of smell were more likely than peers to die within five years.
The authors said that might be because olfactory dysfunction is a sign of more widespread damage, of inflammation or of “advanced physiological aging.”
Depression, malnutrition, and poor food choices could also be factors.
Rawson said that losing your sense of smell takes much of the pleasure out of eating.
“Most of flavor is smell,” she said.
Try eating jelly beans with your eyes closed.
Hold your nose and put one in your mouth.
Then inhale and swallow.
“It’s a completely different experience,” she said.
“Without your nose, jelly beans are basically just sweet or sour.”
That lack of enjoyment can lead to poor nutrition, but smell loss also makes people less likely to notice when milk or other foods good bad.
They also can’t smell when something is burning on the stove or natural gas is leaking.
A surprising finding is that people who’ve lost their sense of smell say they feel more disconnected from others.
“We feel there’s a component of chemical communication between humans that is below the level of consciousness,” Rawson said.
Scents are also a strong cue for emotional memories.
»
ASK US: Do you have a question about the coronavirus and how it affects your health, work and life?
Ask our reporters.
Rawson said there is no medical treatment that would protect the sense of smell during coronavirus infection.
However, people can often regain sense of smell with a process called “smell training.”
It involves smelling a set of odors and thinking about what they are every day.
She said a form of vitamin A called retinoic acid is being tested.
It has to be applied by a doctor.
Rawson hopes Monell’s smell tests will be ready for use by the end of the year.
Smart Band can detect silent hypoxia at an early stage and will enable digital consultations with specialists based on the symptoms detected
IIT Madras-incubated startup Muse Wearables has launched an Artificial Intelligence-powered Personal Wellness Smart Band equipped with a skin temperature sensor and ‘context-aware’ activity tracking.
Called ‘Muse Cue,’ this made-in-India device can detect silent hypoxia at an early stage and has an Intelligent ‘cough analysis’ tool to predict and alert users in advance of the onset of COVID-19 symptoms.
‘Muse Cue’ is the ideal smart wearable to manage personal fitness and monitor vitals including SPo2 (oxygen saturation) and heart rate.
Its AI-infused technology can accurately measure and raise alerts.
The Muse Care Platform will enable digital consultations with doctors.
Muse Cue has two main key functionalities.
Continuous monitoring of the body vitals whether the user is awake or asleep, and then it concludes on the Baseline values of their body.
The AI system in Muse Tracker learns from these baseline values to gain an understanding of the body patterns and provides concrete alerts during discrepancies.
Trackers usually measure vitals based on various electrical impulses, requiring the users to stay still for highly accurate measurements, which help reduce the noise in the signals captured.
The Muse tracker is context-aware and can judge the best moment to start measuring body vitals.
The motion compensator will factor in the slightest of movements that might normally affect readings.
Once the measurements are taken, Muse Cue sends all of the data onto the Muse Health App.
The Launch Price of the product is INR 3,599/- (till 20th September 2020) after which the regular price would be INR 4,999/-.
It can be ordered using the following link - https://in.musewearables.com/ pages/muse-cue .
Pre-orders will be accepted until 20th September 2020, after which the deliveries will commence.
Get the free Morning Headlines email for news from our reporters across the world Sign up to our free Morning Headlines email Please enter a valid email address Please enter a valid email address SIGN UP
I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent.
Read our privacy policy Thanks for signing up to the
Morning Headlines email {{ #verifyErrors }} {{ message }} {{ /verifyErrors }} {{ ^verifyErrors }} Something went wrong.
Please try again later {{ /verifyErrors }}
An amateur footballer had both of his legs amputated days before his 21st birthday after becoming ill with flu symptoms.
Levi Dewey, now 21, suffered multiple organ failure after catching a form of the flu and subsequently suffered severe sepsis and at one point was described as the sickest person in the country.
Levi’s family was told he only had a 30 per cent chance of survival leaving them devastated.
The footballer from Willington, was sporty and lived an active lifestyle playing football for Willington FC and being a lifelong Derby County fan.
The below images are of a graphic nature.
Levi’s family was told he only had a 30 per cent chance of survival ( Supplied )
He’d previously attended John Port Spencer Academy in Etwall, and completed an apprenticeship at age 16 for JCB, before taking up a job there full-time.
But on 7 December, 2022, Levi was taken to Royal Derby Hospital with flu-like symptoms and breathing difficulties.
His condition deteriorated at pace and Levi, who now works as a welder at JCB, went into septic shock and had multi-organ failure.
Doctors discovered that he was suffering from influenza B and pneumococcal pneumonia.
Levi’s mother, Lara Dewey, 47, said: “We were told fairly early on that Levi could potentially lose his legs and need an operation, we were prepared for this outcome if it was to save his life.
“Obviously, it’s going to be life-changing for everyone, but this is something we can work through as a family and we have such a strong and positive support network.
Levi has always had a positive mindset and his glass is always half full.”
The below images are of a graphic nature
Levi’s condition deteriorated at pace after catching Influenza B and Pneumococcal Pneumonia.
( Supplied )
After his condition deteriorated further in Derby’s intensive therapy unit, Levi was transferred to Glenfield Hospital in Leicester to receive ECMO (extracorporeal membrane oxygenation) and full organ support.
He spent 20 days on ECMO - 14 of which were in an induced coma.
Levi was gradually taken off organ support and, after 31 days, he was taken off a ventilator.
On 9 January, Levi was moved back to Royal Derby for ongoing care, but two days later, he was informed that due to the severity of his sepsis he had contracted, he would need below-knee amputation on both of his legs.
Levi had both of his amputated this month ( Supplied )
“Despite this news, Levi remains optimistic about his future.
He is so grateful to be alive after these life changing events,” family of Levi wrote on his GoFund Me page raising finances for him to walk again.
“We want Levi to have the best possible quality of life as a double amputee and therefore want to raise money to help with his recovery and the move from hospital to home.
“Later, once he has learnt to walk, we would like to provide him the best bespoke prosthetic legs so he is able to live as an independent life as possible, enjoying the many activities he did before this tragic event changed his life forever.”
Levi’s family have launched a campaign for him to get the best prosthetic limbs after his amputation ( Supplied )
The family have already raised almost £80,000 as of 30 January.
Mother Lara, a child practitioner, said: “Initially we were looking to raise £10,000 but as you can see this has been exceeded and the response has been extremely overwhelming.
Levi played football for Willington FC ( Supplied )
“It’s overwhelming and emotional and we are all speechless.
It’s amazing how supportive friends, family, colleagues, communities and also strangers have been towards this cause and also their generosity.
“Initially the money will be used to buy Levi a wheelchair and for home improvements, including ramps and showering facilities.
Once he’s able to walk again we will look at buying him the best prosthetic limbs possible privately and any further equipment he will need.”
It was the first day of school.
Melissa Laan had a needy toddler, a set of twins excited for kindergarten, a sick nine-year-old son and a teenager anxious for her first year of high school.
WATCH THE VIDEO ABOVE:
Bowel cancer is not an ‘old man’s disease’
Trends, culture and exclusive features: Sign up for 7LIFE newsletters
“I was busy, I was 34 and didn’t have time to be sick,” the Queenslander tells 7Life.
But by the end of the day, the mum of five was in the ICU on a breathing tube.
“I just had a funny tummy,” she says, explaining how her ordeal began.
Melissa called an ambulance after she began feeling sick.
Credit: Supplied
“I was tired...
I was a healthy, young, fit woman.
“Honestly, I just passed it off as being a tired, single mum.”
In reality, Melissa had a tumour so large it had blocked her bowel, resulting in the mum turning septic.
Spanning 26cm, the mass was bowel cancer - a diagnosis that shocked Melissa.
“This whole stereotype that bowel cancer is an older male thing needs to go,” she says.
Tired single mum
When it comes to the first sign of Melissa’s bowel cancer, she’s ashamed she didn’t seek treatment sooner.
“The silly thing is, I trusted my doctors, but it was just a bit embarrassing,” she says.
Melissa was having trouble passing wind without being able to control her bowel movements.
“At the time, I was also going through a separation, so I thought that maybe I was just stressed,” she adds.
The mum pushed the first warning sign aside and continued her busy life as usual.
For 18 months, she buried her growing digestive issues and increasing fatigue.
With five kids, Melissa says she put off seeking medical help because she had ‘no time to be sick’.
Credit: Supplied
Until one day she vomited what she said resembled brown, grainy coffee grounds and ended up in Emergency.
Doctors quickly found she had a bowel obstruction and sent her for a colonoscopy.
Things quickly snowballed, with the procedure discovering a 9cm growth in her bowel - a mass that had grown a huge 4cm since a scan just two weeks earlier.
Specialists were concerned about the rapid growth and booked Melissa in for surgery.
But she never had the scheduled operation - instead going into theatre earlier, under emergency conditions.
Emergency visit
As her kids piled into the car for the first day of the school year, Melissa began feeling very unwell.
She dropped her daughter off at high school and the twins at kindergarten before heading home with her toddler and nine-year-old son, who had a sniffle.
Back home, she watched as her son put on Paw Patrol, and she made sandwiches as her stomach began churning.
But as her symptoms worsened, she knew she needed help.
The mum is urging anyone with digestive issues to get help because cancer doesn’t discriminate.
Credit:
Supplied
She phoned her mum to come and care for her children, before calling an ambulance.
From her local hospital she was flown to Brisbane, with Melissa confessing her “survival instincts” kicked in.
“The last thing I remember was sitting in a hospital bed just blown out - I was bigger than I was when I was full term with the twins,” she recalls.
Surgeons uncovered the 26cm tumour obstructing her bowel.
With nowhere for her stool to move, the mum had turned septic and her lungs had collapsed.
“I remember waking up in intensive care.
I couldn’t talk.
I had a breathing tube,” Melissa says.
“I just kept thinking this wasn’t part of the plan.”
Melissa is sharing her story to try to save others from the ordeal she endured.
Credit: Supplied
Melissa spent four weeks in hospital and claims this “close call” was a huge pivot in her life.
“I am here now but there is no guarantee for how long,” she says.
For the next six months, she was under close observation but thankfully the cancer showed no signs of returning.
Cost of life
Melissa has since thrown herself into raising awareness for bowel cancer after a so-called “old persons” disease nearly took her life.
“I remember lying in that hospital bed just wanting to make a positive impact - I didn’t want this to happen to anyone else,” she says.
If she had sought medical attention sooner she believes she wouldn’t have ended up on death’s door.
“The cost for early diagnosis is a lot cheaper than a later one,” she says.
“Cancer simply doesn’t care - so always speak to your doctor.”
Play Video Woman’s warning after napkin found on car door landed her in hospital.
Woman’s warning after napkin found on car door landed her in hospital.
Woman’s warning after napkin found on car door landed her in hospital.
For more engaging lifestyle content, visit 7Life on Facebook
When Vanessa Frey’s newly potty-trained 2-year-old daughter came to her late one night and said it hurt to pee, Frey knew something was wrong.
“I walked into the bathroom and immediately noticed a pungent smell,” she says.
Frey took her to the doctor the next day, where they had her daughter pee into a collection device in the toilet.
She learned her daughter had a urinary tract infection (UTI), which, says Frey, luckily went away after a course of antibiotics.
About three in 100 children experience a UTI yearly, according to the National Institute of Health.
While UTIs in babies and kids are typically easy to treat, it’s essential parents recognize the symptoms and seek treatment right away to avoid complications that can lead to a kidney infection and long-term kidney damage.
You may be wondering what causes UTIs and if babies can get UTIs from diapers.
Here’s why UTIs occur, the symptoms, how they’re diagnosed and treated, potential complications, and how to prevent them from recurring.
What Is a UTI?
A urinary tract infection or UTI is a bacterial infection anywhere in the urinary tract.
Bladder infections are the most common type of UTI, but an infection can also appear in the urethra, ureter, and kidneys.
Children of all ages, including newborns, can develop a UTI.
What Are the Common Causes of UTIs in Kids?
UTIs are most commonly caused by bacteria (germs) that travel from the bowels into the urinary tract.
They can also develop when bacteria isn’t expelled from the bladder through urination (often when a child holds their pee too long).
“During their first year of life, boys and girls get UTIs at about the same frequency," explains Antoine Khoury, MD, medical director of urology at Children’s Hospital of Orange County (CHOC), a pediatric health care system based in Orange County, California.
After age 1, Dr. Khoury says girls are more likely to develop UTIs because the channel from their bladder to the exterior, or the urethra, is shorter, and it may also be that moist tissue and the folds of their genitals could allow bacteria to colonize the area more easily.
Uncircumcised kids have a greater risk for UTIs than ones who are circumcised, he says.
Some studies have shown about a three- to 10-fold decrease in UTI rates after circumcision.
Other risk factors include:
Genetics
Poor toilet hygiene
Infrequent urination
Constipation
Holding poop
Not entirely voiding the bowels
Holding urine (Frey learned that her daughter’s infection likely occurred from holding pee, which gives time for bacteria to grow in the bladder.)
About one in three young children under age 2 who have a UTI with a fever have a condition called vesicoureteral reflux (VUR).
That means when the bladder contracts, urine flows upward to the ureters and sometimes the kidneys.
Most children with VUR don’t experience long-term problems.
Can Babies Get a UTI From Diapers?
While wearing diapers doesn’t cause UTIs, infants can get them if germs enter the urinary tract from a dirty diaper or if they are wiped from back to front.
UTI Symptoms in Babies
UTIs can be more difficult to recognize in young children because they don’t always have the same symptoms as adults.
Children under 2 are often unable to articulate what’s wrong.
“Infants may lack energy, run a fever, or have no symptoms,” explains Rama Jayanthi, MD, chief of the department of urology at Dayton Children’s Hospital and chief of urology at Nationwide Children's Hospital in Dayton, Ohio.
But if you have a family history of UTIs or see any of the following symptoms, Dr. Jayanthi says you should take your baby to their health care provider:
Fever (can be the only symptom)
Tiredness
Irritability, crying, or fussiness
Vomiting or diarrhea
Poor appetite or little weight gain
UTI Symptoms in Kids
Older children may experience similar symptoms as adults, including:
Fever (often with rapid onset)
Pain when urinating
Foul-smelling urine
Frequent urination or sudden need to urinate
Pain in the lower back or abdomen
Wetting accidents (when fully potty trained)
Blood in the urine
Tiredness
UTI Diagnosis in Babies and Kids
A urine sample is the only way to diagnose a UTI, says Dr. Jayanthi.
Older children can pee into a sterile cup, while health care providers use a catheter (a thin tube inserted into the ureter and up to the bladder) to collect infant samples.
The sample is then sent to a lab to see what type of bacteria (if any) grows.
UTI Treatment
UTIs are most commonly treated with antibiotics to kill the bacteria causing the infection.
Still, the specific treatment for a child with a UTI will depend on their age, overall health, medical history, and the extent of the infection and symptoms, says Dr. Khoury.
Parents should also give children plenty of liquids and encourage them to empty their bladders frequently.
There’s no scientific evidence that cranberry juice can treat a UTI in children, so while Dr. Jayanthi says there is no harm in giving cranberry juice, he advises parents to skip sugar-laden juice cocktails in favor of healthier beverages.
UTI Complications
Left untreated, UTIs can develop into a kidney infection, which can be serious and lead to kidney damage when not treated promptly.
Frequent UTIs can also lead to kidney scarring.
The American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines state that infants experiencing a UTI accompanied by a fever, and older children who have frequent UTIs, undergo an ultrasound to look for abnormalities in the bladder or kidneys.
How To Prevent UTIs in Kids
Drs.
Jayanthi and Khoury offer the following tips to help prevent UTIs:
Change diapers frequently and thoroughly clean genitals, wiping from front to back.
Teach potty-trained children to use the bathroom when they need to go.
Holding urine in the bladder allows bacteria to grow.
Children should fully empty their bowels when using the bathroom.
As with urination, teach them not to hold it or hurry off the potty in favor of returning to play.
Give children plenty of high-fiber foods and water to help them achieve daily soft bowel movements.
Use soap to wash genitals and teach good hygiene, like hand-washing for 20 seconds.
Avoid bubble baths.
They may irritate the urethra and allow enough time for dirty water to enter the urinary tract.
Despite your best efforts, a UTI may not always be able to be prevented.
That's why it's important for parents to look out for signs and take action to treat a UTI promptly.
High cholesterol is fairly common in the UK, and often does not have symptoms.
Nonetheless, if peripheral artery disease (PAD) occurs it can cause a number of symptoms when the flow of blood in the arteries to certain parts of the body is inhibited.
The NHS states: “The symptoms of PAD often develop slowly, over time.
If your symptoms develop quickly, or get suddenly worse, it could be a sign of a serious problem requiring immediate treatment.”
Vitamin B12 deficiency: A sign to look out for in your poo
The Cleveland Clinic says that many people with PAD do not have any symptoms.
Nonetheless, the first noticeable symptom of PAD may be “intermittent claudication” which is “leg discomfort, pain or cramping that develops with activity, is relieved with rest, and recurs upon resuming activity”.
It states: “The pain is often noticed in the calf, but may also be felt in the buttocks or thighs.
“Intermittent claudication symptoms may also include numbness, weakness, heaviness or fatigue in the leg muscles when walking that are relieved at rest.”
READ MORE:
Cancer warning: The hot drink that is 'strongly' associated with the development of cancer
Swollen sinuses can occur for many reasons, including a viral infection, such as a cold.
However, it is unclear whether SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can also have this effect.
Telling the difference between a sinus infection vs COVID-19 can be challenging because their symptoms are similar.
Because COVID-19 is a respiratory infection, it may affect the nose and sinus cavities in a similar way to other respiratory viruses.
This may result in a blocked or runny nose, headaches, or pain.
However, many other viruses can also cause these symptoms, as can bacterial infections, fungal infections, allergies, and chronic sinusitis.
The only way to confirm or rule out the presence of COVID-19 is to take a test.
Read on to learn more about the link between swollen sinuses and COVID-19.
Coronavirus data All data and statistics are based on publicly available data at the time of publication.
Some information may be out of date.
Visit our coronavirus hub for the most recent information on COVID-19.
Was this helpful?
Can COVID-19 cause swollen sinuses?
Share on Pinterest Design by MNT; Photography by vitapix/Getty Images & Kseniya Ovchinnikova/Getty Images Some people report having swollen sinuses during COVID-19.
However, it is unclear from existing research whether the virus itself causes this.
Respiratory viruses are the most common cause of sinusitis, so it is possible that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, could have this effect.
Respiratory viruses are germs that spread when people come into contact with tiny droplets from coughs and sneezes.
If a virus enters the airways, it could potentially inflame the sinuses.
This can prevent mucus from draining, leading to blockage of the sinuses and nose.
The symptoms of sinusitis include: pressure, pain, or fullness in the face or forehead
a blocked nose
a runny nose or postnasal drip, which is when fluid drains down the back of the throat Some people may also feel pressure or pain in the ears or teeth.
However, many other viruses can cause similar symptoms, so it is impossible to know if COVID-19 is the cause based on symptoms alone.
How to tell what is causing swollen sinuses The only way to tell if a person has COVID-19 is for them to take a COVID-19 test.
However, it is important to note that COVID-19 tests cannot tell a person if their sinus infection is viral, bacterial, or fungal.
Someone who tests positive for COVID-19 could also have another type of sinusitis.
Alternatively, the sinusitis may be due to another cause entirely, such as allergies, pollutants, or a chronic condition.
Positive result
If the test is positive, the symptoms may be due to COVID-19.
Most people recover from COVID-19 without needing medical treatment, so the sinus swelling may go away on its own.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend: staying home for at least 5 days to prevent passing on COVID-19
avoiding contact with others in the household, where possible
letting close contacts know about the result
wearing a well-fitting mask when around others If the test is positive and the symptoms do not get better, or they get better but then worsen, a person will need medical treatment.
Negative result If the COVID-19 test is negative, the amount of SARS-CoV-2 virus a person has in their body may be too low for the test to detect.
This is called a false negative.
If a person suspects they have contracted it but gets a negative result, they can try testing again in 1–2 days .
If the result is accurate, it means something other than COVID-19 is causing swollen sinuses.
It is best to contact a doctor if a person has swollen sinuses in combination with: a high fever
severe pain or swelling in the face, forehead, or ears
chronic sinus pain or impaired drainage that does not go away after 10 days
vulnerability to infections or a suppressed immune system, as a doctor may be able to begin antiviral treatment Seek medical help immediately if a person develops: severe COVID-19 symptoms, such as: difficulty breathing chest pain new confusion blue, gray, or white lips or nails a low blood oxygen level on a pulse oximeter
symptoms that suddenly get much worse
swelling or pain that spreads to the eye area
changes in vision or thinking ability
How to clear the sinuses Blocked sinuses can be uncomfortable.
To relieve the symptoms, a person can try: Steam and heat:
Inhaling steam during a hot shower or bath may help.
Alternatively, people can inhale steam from a bowl of water with a towel over their heads.
Warm compresses may also ease any pain.
Inhaling steam during a hot shower or bath may help.
Alternatively, people can inhale steam from a bowl of water with a towel over their heads.
Warm compresses may also ease any pain.
Massage:
Massaging the sinuses may help with fluid drainage.
People can learn sinus massage techniques or try pressing sinus pressure points.
Massaging the sinuses may help with fluid drainage.
People can learn sinus massage techniques or try pressing sinus pressure points.
Saline rinse: This involves cleaning the nasal passages with a saltwater solution, also known as a sinus flush.
This involves cleaning the nasal passages with a saltwater solution, also known as a sinus flush.
Pain medication: Acetaminophen or other over-the-counter (OTC) pain medications may help reduce discomfort and fever.
Acetaminophen or other over-the-counter (OTC) pain medications may help reduce discomfort and fever.
Decongestants:
OTC decongestant medications may help relieve a blocked nose.
Some also contain pain medications, so make sure to check the ingredients.
OTC decongestant medications may help relieve a blocked nose.
Some also contain pain medications, so make sure to check the ingredients.
Nasal spray: Nasal steroids may help reduce inflammation.
However, these medications can also have side effects.
People can ask a pharmacist for advice on which products to use.
Swollen sinuses after COVID-19 If the sinuses remain swollen after the COVID-19 infection is gone, a person may have a different type of sinus problem or long COVID.
“Long COVID” refers to symptoms that continue for weeks, months, or years after COVID-19.
Scientists have reported cases of chronic sinusitis following COVID-19 infections, as well as persistent loss of the sense of smell.
Although doctors do not yet know what causes these symptoms, a person’s risk of getting long COVID is higher if they have severe COVID-19, a weakened immune system, or are not up-to-date on their vaccines.
A person with ongoing sinus symptoms after COVID-19 may benefit from treatments for chronic sinusitis.
However, more research is necessary to confirm this.
DBS decreases pathological hyperactivity of pyramidal cells
To understand how DBS affects cortical activity, we first aimed at depicting the electrophysiological signature of Parkinson’s disease at the neuronal level in the primary motor cortex (M1).
We performed in vivo single unit juxtacellular recordings of pyramidal neurons in deep layers of M1 in a rat model of Parkinson’s disease (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 1a) by unilateral stereotaxic injection of 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc).
In anesthetized 6-OHDA-lesioned rats, we observed an increase in the spontaneous firing rate of M1 pyramidal cells (n = 41) compared to sham animals (n = 36) (p = 0.0014) (Fig. 1b), in line with previous observations10,18.
We then explored the effect of DBS (STN stimulation parameters: 2–4 V, 60 μs at 130 Hz during 2 min) on this pathophysiological hyperactivity of M1 pyramidal neurons.
In 6-OHDA-lesioned rats, we found that the increased firing activity was diminished by DBS (p = 0.0311, n = 20) back to physiological firing rates (Fig. 1b), with 68% of pyramidal cells inhibited by DBS (Fig. 1c).
DBS also decreased M1 neuron firing rate in sham animals (p = 0.0266, n = 19), and the proportion of inhibited neurons, as well as the change in firing rate, were similar in sham and 6-OHDA-lesioned rats (p = 1 and p = 0.7894, respectively) (Supplementary Fig.
1b, c).
Overall, DBS diminished the firing rate of pyramidal cells in sham rats and normalized their pathophysiological hyperactivity in parkinsonian rats.
Fig.
1: DBS mediates in vivo inhibition M1 pyramidal cells in rats.
a In vivo experimental set-up in anesthetized adult rats.
b TH immunostaining and representative raster plots (15 s) of M1 neurons activity recorded in sham rats and in 6-OHDA-lesioned rats with or without DBS.
Spontaneous activity of cortical neurons (mean ± SEM and individual neurons are represented) was higher in 6-OHDA-lesioned (n = 41 neurons) compared to sham (n = 36) rats (p = 0.0014, t-test); DBS decreased the hyperactivity observed in 6-OHDA-lesioned rats (Off vs DBS: p = 0.0311, DBS vs Post: p = 0.0811, paired t-test, n = 20 neurons).
c
Heatmap of individual cortical neurons normalized firing rate (top), and averaged time course (bottom), before, during and after DBS (10s bins) in 6-OHDA-lesioned rat: bars correspond to the median of all neurons (mean ± 2×SD of the baseline is indicated) and separate time courses (mean ± SEM) for activated and inhibited neurons are superimposed.
Under DBS, 65% of the pyramidal cells were inhibited while 35% were activated (n = 20).
All statistical tests are two-tailed.
*p < 0.05; **p < 0.005.
Full size image
GABAergic circuits mediate DBS inhibition of pyramidal cells
We next investigated the mechanistic underpinnings related to the decreased activity of pyramidal cells under DBS.
For this purpose, we performed single-cell in vivo intracellular recordings of electrophysiologically identified M1 pyramidal cells in anesthetized rats (Fig. 2a).
Spontaneous firing of pyramidal cells was determined before and during 150 s of DBS.
We further confirmed that DBS decreased the spontaneous firing rate (p = 0.0002, n = 20) of M1 pyramidal neurons (Fig. 2b).
This decrease was accompanied by a hyperpolarization of −3.7 ± 1.0 mV of their membrane potential (p = 0.0007, n = 20) (Fig. 2b), and a decrease in their membrane time constant (p = 0.0390, n = 18), input resistance (p = 0.0497, n = 19) and AP threshold (p = 0.0263, n = 20), without affecting their Ih current (p = 0.2336, n = 17).
In a subset of cells (n = 3) that were antidromically activated by STN stimulation, the antidromically-evoked action potentials were rapidly shunted and a marked hyperpolarization was observed (Supplementary Fig.
1d).
We further characterized DBS-induced changes in pyramidal cell excitability by applying successive depolarizing current steps before and during continuous DBS (Fig. 2c).
DBS induced a decrease in depolarization-evoked activity, associated with an increased rheobase (p = 0.0312, n = 17), without affecting the gain (p = 0.1746, n = 17) of pyramidal cell f–I curve.
Overall, the decrease of several properties of pyramidal cell excitability under DBS could participate in the decrease of their firing activity.
Fig.
2: Intracellular mechanisms of DBS inhibition of M1 pyramidal cells in rats.
a In vivo experimental set-up.
b M1 pyramidal neurons recorded intracellularly display a decreased spontaneous activity (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, n = 20, p = 0.0002), and hyperpolarized membrane potential (p = 0.0007) during DBS (mean ± SEM and individual neurons); 95% were spontaneously active.
c
Pyramidal cell transfer function quantified with and without DBS.
Depolarizing current steps (200 ms, 0–1.2 nA in 0.2 nA steps) were applied at 1 Hz before and during 100 s of DBS.
DBS decreases evoked spiking activity.
Left: raw data example and f–I relationship in a pyramidal neuron, showing a decreased evoked firing rate during DBS (DBS effect F 1,90 = 155.72, p = 2.5 × 10−21, 2-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni-corrected post-hoc tests: all p < 10−3 for 0.4–1 nA injected current).
Right: DBS increases the rheobase (p = 0.0312, Wilcoxon signed-rank test, n = 17 neurons), without affecting the gain of the f–I curve (p = 0.1746, paired t-test) (mean ± SEM and individual neurons).
Rheobase and gain were respectively determined as the x-intercept and the slope of the f-I curve after a linear fit.
d Single-shock STN stimulation induces a pause in M1 pyramidal evoked firing.
Top: representative trial and raster plot of current-evoked activity for 10 trials in the same neuron.
Bottom: the interval between the STN stimulation and the next evoked-spike is longer than between the STN stimulation and the previous evoked spike (p = 0.0057, paired t-test, n = 6 neurons) (mean ± SEM and individual neurons).
e Voltage-dependency of the potential evoked by single-shock STN stimulation.
Left: a single-shock STN stimulation (red line) applied during hyperpolarizing or depolarizing current steps (−1.8 to +1.0 nA in 0.2 nA increments, mean of 10 trials) elicits an evoked potential (dashed line).
Zoom of the PSP evoked by STN single stimulation for −1.6 nA injected current.
The amplitude of the early phase of the PSP is inversely correlated with the membrane potential when the stimulation was applied (voltage-dependency of 9 individual neurons).
Right: the STN-evoked potential reverses around −71.7 mV (n = 9 neurons) (mean ± SEM and individual neurons).
DBS artifacts were removed in b, c for clarity.
All statistical tests are two-tailed.
*p < 0.05; **p < 0.005; ***p < 0.001.
Full size image
To determine the evoked conductances in M1 pyramidal cells, we next applied single STN stimulations (2–4 V, 60 μs) (Fig. 2d, e).
We observed a post-stimulation hyperpolarization, sufficient to delay the evoked firing activity (p = 0.0057, n = 6) (Fig. 2d).
Analysis of the voltage-dependency showed that the early phase of the evoked postsynaptic responses reversed at −71.7 ± 2.7 mV (n = 9) (Fig. 2e), which corresponds to the chloride reversal potential19.
These results suggest that DBS recruits GABAergic circuits responsible for the hyperpolarization of pyramidal cells and the increase in rheobase, leading to the reduced activity observed in both in vivo juxtacellular and intracellular recordings of M1 pyramidal cells.
Somatostatin interneurons are activated by DBS
In M1, GABAergic inhibition is provided by local neuronal populations mainly composed of PV and SST interneurons20.
To identify the cell-type specific populations recruited by DBS, we used genetically modified mice expressing channelrhodopsin (ChR2) in either PV (Pv::ChR2 mice) or SST (Sst::ChR2 mice) interneurons (Fig. 3, Supplementary Figs. 2 and 3).
We ensured that ChR2 was expressed in the targeted populations with minimal non-specific expression (Supplementary Fig. 2).
Fig.
3: In vivo DBS activates somatostatin interneurons in mice.
a In vivo experimental setup.
A bipolar electrode is lowered into the STN and an optical fiber is placed over M1, while recording from neurons in M1.
b, Top: electrophysiological traces of representative opto-identified pyramidal, SST, and PV neurons recorded in M1.
SST and PV neurons are opto-activated by brief flashes of light (shown in blue).
c Photomicrographs of juxtacellularly labeled and immuhistologically identified pyramidal, SST and PV neurons (n = 10, 6, and 3 independent experiments with similar results for pyramidal, SST, and PV cells, respectively) (bar scale = 30 µm).
Bottom: Raster plots representing the activity of the neurons described above in response to 2-min DBS at 120 µA. Spikes occurring during the DBS are represented in red.
d
Heatmaps of individual pyramidal, PV and SST neuron activity (normalized by the maximal firing rate of each neuron), before, during and after DBS (10s bins) (only non-silent neurons are represented).
e
Averaged time course of DBS-induced modulation of pyramidal, PV and SST neuron activity (bars: mean ± SEM of all non-silent neurons, and the mean ± 2 ×
SD of the baseline is superimposed).
Boxplots indicate the firing rates before, during and after DBS of pyramidal (Off vs DBS: p = 0.0297, and DBS vs Post: p = 0.0085, n = 28, two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test), PV (p = 0.0074 and p = 0.0495, n = 27) and SST (p = 0.0040 and p = 0.0019, n = 26) neurons (including silent neurons).
Box plots: the center is the median; box: 25% and 75% quartiles; whiskers extend to the last data point within 1.5* the interquartile range outside of the box range (data outside the whisker range are not shown, but are included in the statistical analysis).
f Proportion of pyramidal, PV, and SST neurons activated (white), inhibited (black), non-modulated (gray) during DBS or silent (hatched) throughout the recording.
The number of neurons is indicated for each category.
*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01.
Full size image
In mice, stereotaxic targeting of the STN for DBS is challenging.
To ensure the proper placement of the stimulation electrode, we first lowered a microelectrode to electrophysiologically localize the STN based on typical STN neuron firing (Supplementary Fig. 3a), and in a second step implanted the DBS electrode at the same coordinates (Supplementary Fig. 3b).
We then performed in vivo juxtacellular recordings of M1 neurons in anesthetized Pv::ChR2 and Sst::ChR2 mice to monitor DBS-evoked responses in opto-identified neuronal subpopulations (Figs. 3a, b and Supplementary 3c, d).
Namely, once the DBS electrode was inserted in STN, an optical fiber placed on top of M1 shone light (100 ms at 0.5 Hz) and opto-responsive neurons were detected by a recording microelectrode lowered within M1.
PV and SST interneurons were distinguished from pyramidal neurons by their responses to light in Pv::ChR2 and Sst::ChR2 mice, and by post-hoc clustering of their waveform characteristics based on principal component analysis (Supplementary Fig.
3c, d).
A subset of PV, SST, and pyramidal neurons were juxtacellularly labeled with neurobiotin for immunohistochemical and morphological identification and used as ground truths for the principal component analysis (Fig. 3c and Supplementary Fig.
3c–e).
Most (75%) of the recorded neurons were located in M1 layer V (n = 72 neurons subjected to DBS; Supplementary Fig. 3e).
In agreement with in vivo recordings in anaesthetized mice21, SST interneurons exhibited a lower spontaneous activity compared to PV cells (p = 0.0002, PV and SST median firing rates were 1.23 and 0.05 Hz, respectively; Fig. 3d).
Consistent with our observations in rats, DBS (60 µs, 120 µA at 130 Hz) decreased the firing activity of pyramidal cells in the transgenic mouse lines (p = 0.0297, n = 28; Fig.
3d–f).
We then investigated DBS effect on PV interneurons.
Surprisingly, DBS decreased their activity (p = 0.0074, n = 28; Fig.
3d–f).
We next examined SST interneurons and observed that DBS caused the opposite effect, i.e. increasing SST firing (p = 0.0040, n = 26; Fig.
3d–f).
These effects were robust across cell populations as 64% of the SST cells were excited and 70% of the PV cells were inhibited (Fig. 3f).
The activity of pyramidal, PV, and SST cells was stable under DBS, and reversible (with a shorter delay after DBS offset for PV cells than for SST and pyramidal neurons).
Interestingly, the kinetics of DBS effects on pyramidal cells mirrored those of SST interneurons: we observed similar delays between DBS onset and its effects on pyramidal and SST cells, and also at DBS offset (Fig. 3e).
Consistently, the modulation of pyramidal cells was strongly correlated with SST interneuron activity during and after DBS (r = −0.91, p = 1.0 × 10−9).
Therefore, DBS efficiently drives activation of M1 SST interneurons, concurrently inhibiting M1 pyramidal cells.
Activity of PV and SST cells in sham and parkinsonian mice
Since DBS both normalizes pyramidal cell hyperactivity and differentially recruits PV and SST interneurons, we further explored the firing rate modulation of interneurons in parkinsonian conditions.
Indeed, hyperactivity of pyramidal cells observed in 6-OHDA-lesioned animals could be caused by a decreased activity of GABAergic interneurons.
We performed in vivo juxtacellular recordings of neurons opto-identified and clustered by principal component analysis as PV or SST cells in anesthetized sham (PV cells = 27 and SST cells = 26) and 6-OHDA-lesioned (PV cells = 14 and SST cells = 15) Pv::ChR2 and Sst::ChR2 mice (Fig. 4a, b).
The spontaneous firing activity of PV cells was similar in sham and parkinsonian Pv::ChR2 mice (p = 0.8391 with n = 32 in sham and n = 14 in 6-OHDA-lesioned mice).
Similarly, the spontaneous firing rate of SST cells was not different in sham and 6-OHDA-lesioned mice (p = 0.2112 with n = 32 in sham and n = 15 in 6-OHDA-lesioned mice).
Pyramidal hyperactivity in parkinsonian models is not likely due to changes in electrophysiological activity of cortical GABAergic populations.
Fig.
4: In vivo synaptic transmission of PV and SST cells onto M1 pyramidal cells.
a In vivo experimental setup.
b Juxtacellular recordings of opto-identified PV and SST interneurons in sham and 6-OHDA-lesioned Sst::ChR2 and PV::ChR2 anesthetized mice.
Representative raster plots and spontaneous activity of SST and PV interneurons (boxplots and individual neurons) show similar activity in sham and 6-OHDA-lesioned mice (PV: p = 0.8391, n = 32 cells in sham vs n = 14 in 6-OHDA-lesioned mice; SST: p = 0.2112, n = 32 cells in sham vs n = 15 in 6-OHDA-lesioned mice, Wilcoxon unpaired test).
Box plots, center: median; box: 25% and 75% quartiles, whiskers: last data point within 1.5*
the interquartile range outside of the box.
c–i In vivo patch-clamp recordings of M1 pyramidal cells in Sst::ChR2 and PV::ChR2 anesthetized mice.
c Representative traces (left) and averaged peak amplitude (top right) of evoked-PSP following single pulse (3 ms) opto-PV or opto-SST.
Opto-PV/SST evoked-PSP of similar amplitudes (p = 0.3397, n = 8 vs n = 9, p = 0.8632, n = 7 vs n = 7 and p = 0.8838, n = 8 vs n = 7, for −100, 0 and +100 pA current injection, respectively, unpaired t-test).
(bottom right)
Opto-PSPs voltage-dependency, which reversed at −71.5 for opto-PV (n = 6) and −75.2 mV for opto-SST (n = 4) (p = 0.0542, unpaired t-test).
Calculated chloride reversal: −71.9
mV. d
Area, peak amplitude, slope and delay of evoked-PSP by opto-PV (n = 7) or opto-SST (n = 9).
In all cases the pulse duration factor had a significant influence (area: F 3,33 = 4.946, p = 0.0060; peak: F 3,33 = 6.206, p = 0.0029; slope: F 3,33 = 2.956, p = 0.0466; delay: F 3,33 = 6.349, p = 0.0016, 2-way repeated measures ANOVA), with no difference between PSP evoked by opto-PV/SST, except for the delay to peak (F 1,11 = 66.39, p < 0.0001).
e Representative voltage traces and heatmap of individual cortical neurons normalized activity, and averaged time course for opto-PV (n = 5) or opto-SST (n = 8) at 67 Hz (3 ms pulses);
Injected current: +100 pA. Opto-PV/SST both inhibit pyramidal cell activity (p = 0.0392, p = 0.0010 paired t-test), with a lower effect of opto-SST (last 2.5 s, p = 0.0326, Mann–Whitney U test).
Peak amplitude (p = 0.2270) (f), delay to trough (p = 0.0124) (g), amplitude (last 100 ms) (p = 0.0384) (h) and Vm variance (p = 0.0371) (i) of the evoked-hyperpolarization by opto-PV/SST at 67 Hz (n = 5 and 8 cells from 4 PV::Chr2 and 6 Sst::ChR2 mice, respectively).
All data are presented as mean ± SD.
*p < 0.05; ***p < 0.001.
All statistical tests are two-tailed.
Full size image
Inhibitory evoked-responses by PV or SST opto-activation
To investigate the synaptic weight of the inhibitory inputs onto pyramidal cells, we performed in vivo patch-clamp whole-cell recordings in anesthetized Pv::ChR2 and Sst::ChR2 mice (Fig. 4c–f).
We recorded pyramidal cells upon opto-activation of PV or SST interneurons.
First, we characterized the evoked-PSP following single opto-stimulation (3–20 ms).
The opto-activation of PV and SST cells evoked PSPs of similar amplitudes in pyramidal cells, regardless of the membrane potential (p = 0.3397, n = 8 pyramidal cells in Pv::ChR2 vs. 6 in Sst::ChR2 held at −95/−80 mV; p = 0.8632, n = 7 vs. 7 held at −65/–50 mV and p = 0.8838, n = 7 vs. 9 held at −40/−30 mV) (Fig. 4c).
We analyzed the voltage-dependency of opto-PSPs, which reversed at −71.5 mV in Pv::ChR2 (n = 6 pyramidal cells) and −75.2 mV in Sst::ChR2 (n = 4) mice (p = 0.0542) (Fig. 4c), close to the calculated chloride reversal, −71.9 mV. Single-pulse opto-activation of PV (n = 7) and SST (n = 6) cells induced PSPs whose area, amplitude, rise time and delay to peak increased with increasing opto-pulse duration (2-way repeated-measures ANOVA; Fig. 4d).
There was no difference between PSPs evoked by PV or SST opto-activation, except for the delay to peak amplitude which was shorter upon PV than SST opto-activation (F 1,11 = 66.39, p < 0.0001).
We then investigated the effects of opto-activation of PV or SST cells at 67 Hz for 5 s (see “Methods” and Supplementary Fig. 4a–d for opto-stimulation frequency selection) (Fig. 4e–i).
We observed that opto-activation of PV or SST cells induced a hyperpolarization of similar peak amplitude (p = 0.2270, Fig. 4f), with a shorter delay upon PV activation (p = 0.0124; Fig. 4g) that strongly inhibited the firing activity of pyramidal cells (p = 0.0392, n = 5 in Pv::ChR2 mice, p = 0.001, n = 8 in Sst::ChR2 mice) (Fig. 4e).
However, in the later part of the pulse, opto-activation of SST cells induced a less pronounced membrane hyperpolarization than opto-activation of PV cells (p = 0.0371; Fig. 4h), together with a partial release of the spiking inhibition only in Sst::ChR2 mice (p = 0.0326; Fig. 4e).
In addition, the variance of the membrane potential was larger under opto-activation of SST than PV cells (p = 0.0371; Fig. 4i), denoting a strong shunting of synaptic activity reaching the soma by PV opto-activation, whereas some synaptic activity subsisted (leading eventually to spikes) under SST opto-activation.
M1 SST cell opto-activation alleviates parkinsonian symptoms
Since DBS activates SST interneurons, we hypothesized that cortical SST interneurons could constitute a target to efficiently mimic the effects of DBS.
Therefore, we tested whether the direct activation of GABAergic interneurons would improve motor symptoms in freely moving parkinsonian mice.
We first compared the respective effects of SST and PV opto-activation at 67 Hz (see “Methods” and Supplementary Fig. 4a–d for opto-stimulation frequency selection).
For this purpose, unilaterally 6-OHDA-lesioned mice (Sst::ChR2, Pv::ChR2 and wild-type mice) were ipsilaterally implanted with an optical fiber in M1 (Fig. 5a).
We monitored the impact of opto-stimulation on the asymmetrical locomotor behavior induced by unilateral 6-OHDA-lesioning in three different tasks: the open field (Fig. 5b–g), cylinder test (Fig. 5h–m) and cross-maze (Fig. 5n–s).
Fig.
5: Opto-activation of M1 SST interneurons alleviates parkinsonian symptoms.
a Unilaterally 6-OHDA-lesioned Sst::ChR2, Pv::ChR2 and wild-type mice were either implanted with an optic fiber in M1 ipsilateral to the lesion, or implanted with a stimulating DBS electrode in the STN, or injected with levodopa (6 mg/kg).
b–g Rotational behavior and locomotor activity were quantified in an open field, in the presence or absence of light, DBS or levodopa injection (b: 30 s of trajectory shown in both conditions in a Sst::ChR2 mouse; circles and arrows indicate the starting point and direction of the animal).
The number of rotations ipsilateral to the 6-OHDA lesion was decreased during opto-stimulation in Sst::ChR2 (c: p = 0.0010, n = 11 mice) and in Pv::ChR2 (d: p = 0.0123, n = 12) mice, but not in wild-type (non-opsin expressing) animals (e: p = 0.5591, n = 11).
DBS did not affect the rotational behavior (f: p = 0.2082, n = 12), while levodopa treatment induced contralateral rotations (g: p = 0.0004, n = 10).
Opto-stimulation did not affect the distance traveled in either mouse strain (Sst::ChR2 p = 0.5721; Pv::ChR2 p = 0.0737; wild-type p = 0.6289), while both DBS and levodopa treatment increased the locomotor activity (p = 0.0438, and p = 0.0135, respectively).
h–m Cylinder test: (h), the asymmetry in front paw usage preference decreased when SST interneurons were opto-activated (i: p = 0.0156, n = 9), but not when opto-stimulation was used in Pv:ChR2 (j: p = 0.9139, n = 9) or wild-type mice (k: p = 0.38, n = 9).
DBS had no effect on front paw usage (l: p = 0.9768, n = 12), while levodopa injection reversed the front paw bias (m: p = 0.0002, n = 10).
n–s, Cross-maze test: (n), ipsilateral turn preference was decreased in favor of straight turns during opto-stimulation in Sst::ChR2 mice (o: ipsi turns p = 0.0019, straight turns p = 0.0022, and contra turns p = 0.1014, n = 11), but not in Pv::ChR2 (p: p = 0.1876, p = 0.3419, and p = 0.0960, n = 12) nor in wild-type (q: p
= 0.8292, p = 0.9755, and p = 0.3409, n = 11) mice.
DBS did not affect ipsilateral turn bias (r: p = 0.2040, p = 0.7675, and p = 0.3388, n = 12), while levodopa reversed the preference toward a majority of contralateral choices (s: p = 0.0029, p = 0.4072, and p = 0.0029, n = 7).
Mean ± SEM of all tested mice, as well as individual mice, are represented for all tests.
All statistical tests are two-tailed paired t-tests.
*p < 0.05; **p < 0.005; ***p < 0.001.
Full size image
Opto-activation of SST interneurons in 6-OHDA-lesioned Sst::ChR2 mice successfully decreased their asymmetrical locomotor behavior.
Indeed, in the open field, opto-activation of SST cells in 6-OHDA-lesioned Sst::ChR2 mice decreased spontaneous ipsilateral rotations (n = 11 mice; rotations/min: p = 0.001; Fig. 5c and normalized rotations: p = 0.0002; Supplementary Fig. 4e).
This decrease in asymmetrical behavior did not result from a decreased locomotor activity, which remained unaffected by opto-activation of SST cells (p = 0.5721; Fig. 5c).
In the cylinder test, the opto-activation of SST cells decreased the asymmetry in front paw usage preference (p = 0.0156, n = 9; Fig. 5i).
In the cross-maze, 6-OHDA-lesioned Sst::ChR2 mice (n = 11) exhibited a strong bias towards ipsilateral turns (Fig. 5o), as expected for hemi-parkinsonian rodents, while sham-lesioned Sst::ChR2 mice (n = 5) displayed no turn preference (Supplementary Fig. 4g).
During SST opto-activation, a decrease in the ipsilateral bias (p = 0.0019) and an increase in the straight choice (p = 0.0022; Fig. 5o), were observed.
PV interneuron opto-activation only partially reproduced the improvement in motor symptoms induced by SST opto-activation.
In 6-OHDA-lesioned Pv::ChR2 mice, opto-activation decreased spontaneous ipsilateral rotations (n = 12; rotations/min: p = 0.0123; Fig. 5d and normalized rotations: p = 0.0125; Supplementary Fig. 4e) without affecting locomotor activity (p = 0.0737; Fig. 5d).
However, opto-activation of PV cells did not decrease the asymmetrical locomotor behavior in the cylinder test (p = 0.9139, n = 9; Fig. 5j) or in the cross-maze task (n = 12; p = 0.1876 for ipsilateral, p = 0.3419 for straight, and p = 0.0960 for contralateral turn preference; Fig. 5p).
Interestingly, opto-activation of cortical interneurons in Sst::ChR2 or Pv::ChR2 sham-mice did not induce an asymmetrical behavior contralateral to the opto-activation neither in the open field (Supplementary Fig. 4f) nor in the cross-maze task (Supplementary Fig. 4g).
This indicates that the reduced asymmetry observed upon SST opto-activation in 6-OHDA-lesioned mice is due to an improvement of pathological symptoms rather than a generic effect of unilateral opto-activation of cortical interneurons.
We also ensured that opto-stimulation in wild-type (non-opsin expressing) 6-OHDA-lesioned mice, did not affect spontaneous ipsilateral rotations (n = 11; rotations/min: p = 0.5591; Fig. 5e and normalized rotations: p = 0.2540; Supplementary Fig. 4e) or locomotor activity (p = 0.6289; Fig. 5e) in the open field, asymmetry in front paw usage preference in the cylinder test (p = 0.3841, n = 9; Fig. 5k) and asymmetrical locomotor behavior in the cross-maze (n = 11; p = 0.8292 for ipsilateral, p = 0.9755 for straight, and p = 0.3409 for contralateral turn preference; Fig. 5q).
We next evaluated the effects of DBS and levodopa treatments in wild-type 6-OHDA-lesioned mice in open-field, cylinder and cross-maze tasks, for comparison with opto-activation of SST and PV cells.
In the open-field, DBS did not reduce the spontaneous ipsilateral rotations (n = 12; rotations/min: p = 0.2082; Fig. 5f and normalized rotations: p = 0.2456; Supplementary Fig. 4e) but increased the locomotor activity (p = 0.0438; Fig. 5f), in line with a recent report22.
DBS did not modify asymmetrical locomotor behavior for the cylinder test (n = 12, p = 0.9768; Fig. 5l) or in the cross-maze (n = 12; p = 0.2040 for ipsilateral, p = 0.7675 for straight, and p = 0.3388 for contralateral turn preference; Fig. 5r).
Levodopa treatment (6 mg/kg) in 6-OHDA-lesioned mice efficiently reversed the spontaneous ipsilateral rotations into contralateral rotations (n = 10; rotations/min: p = 0.0004; Fig. 5g and normalized rotations: p = 2.0 ×
10−5; Supplementary Fig. 4e) and increased the locomotor activity (p = 0.0135) in the open-field.
The asymmetry in front paw usage preference was reversed to contralateral preference (n = 10, p = 0.0002; Fig. 5m) in the cylinder test, as well as the ipsilateral bias (n = 7, p = 0.0029) in favor of contralateral (p = 0.0029) turn preference in the cross-maze (Fig. 5s).
Therefore, specific opto-activation of cortical SST interneurons alleviates the asymmetrical behavior while electrical DBS increases locomotor activity in parkinsonian mice.
M1 L5 model recapitulates DBS effects on cortical firing
To better understand the beneficial effects of DBS and SST opto-activation, we theoretically tested the information processing capabilities of cortical networks in control and parkinsonian conditions under DBS and when activating PV or SST interneurons.
To this purpose, we built a simplified spiking neural network model of L5 motor cortex, including pyramidal, PV, and SST cells modeled as adaptive exponential integrate-and-fire neurons (Fig. 6a).
The choices of intrinsic parameters defining each population (Supplementary Table 1), network architecture and synaptic strengths (Fig. 6a) were guided by experimental23,24,25,26,27,28,29 and modeling30 data.
In particular, we modeled PV and SST interneurons as fast-spiking and low-threshold spiking neurons, respectively.
As for the network architecture, we set lower conductances for excitatory synapses compared to inhibitory ones31,32.
Both PV and SST interneurons inhibited pyramidal cells, with similar connection probability but a stronger synaptic weight from PV to pyramidal cells25,26.
Importantly, only PV cells received excitatory feedback24.
The choice of asymmetric inhibitory strength between PV and SST neurons, as well as the respectively weak and strong self-inhibition for SST and PV cells are based on previous reports26,31.
The hyperexcitability of pyramidal cells in the parkinsonian condition10 was considered by decreasing their firing threshold.
Finally, DBS-mediated currents were modeled as instantaneous excitatory inputs to all cells, with no preconception of the pathway involved to reach each population (directly via antidromic or orthodromic connections from STN to cortex, or indirectly through basal ganglia loops), thus representing the sum of DBS network effects.
Fig.
6: A simplified M1 model recapitulates DBS effects on cortical activity.
a Model architecture (left) of layer V motor cortex, with population-specific connection probability p and synaptic weight w (arrow: excitatory, bar: inhibitory).
Raster plot (center) before, during, and after DBS.
Population firing rate (mean ± SD) across different conditions and for varying DBS frequencies (right).
All firing rates are significantly (p < 0.001) different from those observed in the parkinsonian condition (p < 0.001, n = 20 independent simulations of 1000 ms, with different intrinsic noises and connectivity patterns).
b Average firing rate of pyramidal cells relative to the parkinsonian condition (n = 20 independent simulations) as a function of the percentage of DBS current intensity received by SST and PV interneurons (default DBS parameters with maximal intensity: 120 pA).
50% of pyramidal cells receive DBS current.
Black line: isocline corresponding to a ratio of 1 (no change from parkinsonian condition).
c
Impact of adding an excitatory feedback connection (with a probability p = 0.1 or 0.3 and variable weight w) between pyramidal and SST neurons on the modulation of pyramidal cell firing rate under DBS (default DBS parameters).
The increase in the excitability of SST interneurons was compensated by decreasing their external current I ext such that the ratio of SST firing rate under DBS vs. parkinsonian condition remained bounded between −0.5 and +0.5 of the initial ratio, obtained without the feedback connection.
d
Raster plot and population firing rate (mean ± SD, n = 20 independent simulations) under optogenetic activation of SST (top) and PV (right) interneurons at various frequencies (50% of PV or SST interneurons are opto-activated with pulses of 3 ms, of 600 pA).
For panels a, d: see Supplementary Data 1.
Full size image
Consistent with our experimental findings, we observed a decrease in the firing rate of both pyramidal and PV cells while SST interneurons were activated at all tested frequencies and the impact was stronger with increasing stimulation frequency (p < 0.001; Fig. 6a).
This phenomenon remained robust to changes in the parameters of 130 Hz DBS stimulation (pulse duration and amplitude; Supplementary Fig. 5a) and linearly scaled with the overall amount of current injected in the network (Supplementary Fig.
5b).
The impact of DBS on network activity was almost immediate (15–20 ms lag) since DBS acts as an instantaneous current in our simplified model.
We next evaluated the relative contributions of PV and SST interneurons for driving changes in pyramidal cell activity under DBS.
We found a larger decrease of pyramidal cell activity in response to DBS-induced stimulations of SST compared to PV interneurons (Fig. 6b and Supplementary Fig. 5c).
In particular, no decrease in pyramidal cell activity was observed in the absence of DBS-induced current on SST interneurons (Fig. 6b and Supplementary Fig.
5c).
We hypothesized that the asymmetrical efficacy of cortical interneurons in reducing pyramidal cell firing under DBS could be due to their asymmetrical connectivity with pyramidal cells.
Indeed, in the motor cortex, L5 SST interneurons engage in feedforward inhibition, receiving no or little excitation from L5 pyramidal cells24, in contrast to PV interneurons.
This hypothesis was validated when evaluating the impact of adding an excitatory feedback from pyramidal cells to SST neurons on pyramidal cell firing: once the strength of this connection became comparable to the excitatory drive from pyramidal cells to PV neurons, the modulation of pyramidal cell activity under DBS was no longer detectable (Fig. 6c).
Finally, we modeled the opto-activation of cortical interneurons by adding an external current to half of PV or SST neurons, constituted by a series of pulses repeated at the same frequency as those used experimentally.
These simulated opto-activations of PV and SST interneurons at 67 and 130 Hz both led to a remarkable inhibition of pyramidal cell activity (Fig. 6d), yielding a very sparse residual activity of pyramidal cells, as experimentally observed (Supplementary Fig.
4c, d).
Cortical information processing under DBS or opto-stimulation
Based on our simplified network model, we investigated how pyramidal cell activity reduction, by DBS or SST opto-activation, could account for the improved motor function.
The impact of the modifications of the network activity on information transmission in these conditions is not heuristically obvious: in Parkinson’s disease, the increased excitability of pyramidal cells could make the system more responsive to stimuli, but the higher spontaneous activity may interfere with stimulus-evoked activity.
In contrast, the lower spontaneous activity induced by DBS and DBS-guided opto-activation may avoid signal degradation, but could bring the system to a less responsive state.
We first tested whether pyramidal cells conserve the capacity to generate specific patterns of activity in response to stimuli despite sparse activity under DBS or opto-activation.
We applied 28 inputs with different motifs (deterministic constant and ramping stimuli, and stochastic Ornstein–Uhlenbeck processes; Supplementary Table 2) and intensities to subsets of pyramidal cells (Fig. 7a, b), and systematically evaluated the information conveyed by the network.
We found that for medium to high amplitude stimuli, pyramidal cell responses were less correlated with the stimulus in parkinsonian condition compared to control.
Both DBS and SST opto-activation increased the correlation coefficients when compared to parkinsonian condition, with smoother response profiles to each stimulus (Fig. 7b, c and Supplementary Fig. 6).
PV opto-activation led to weak correlation coefficients (Fig. 7b, c and Supplementary Fig. 6).
Importantly, the differential impact of PV and SST opto-activation remained consistent over a large range of current intensities.
The reduced efficacy of PV opto-activation was not only due to the higher silencing level of pyramidal cells but also to the induction of oscillatory-like responses (Supplementary Fig.
7a, b).
Finally, low amplitude stimuli yielded weak correlations that were not significantly different across conditions and thus did not confer any advantage to the parkinsonian condition (Fig. 7c).
Fig.
7: Theoretical impact of DBS and opto-PV/SST on cortical information processing.
a Procedure for calculating Pearson correlations between network responses and time-varying stimuli (4 constant stimuli, 8 ramping stimuli, and 8 stochastic stimuli) and for training the classifiers.
Example traces of moving spike counts and the resulting distribution of correlation coefficients are displayed on the top right.
Binned pyramidal cell spiking responses were first densified using a random matrix to serve as inputs for the classifiers (cf.
“Methods”).
b Raster plots of network responses to a ramp.
c
Heatmaps of median Pearson correlation coefficients (n = 100 independent simulations) for ramping stimuli (left) and stochastic inputs (right).
d Accuracy (mean ± SD, n = 25 independent simulations) of four different classifiers, defined as the percentage of correct predictions of stimulus identity from pyramidal cell activity.
Statistical comparisons to the parkinsonian condition are performed using One-Way ANOVA (or Kruskal–Wallis test for c) with Tukey–Kramer post-hoc tests, *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.
Statistical tests are all two-tailed.
For panels c, d: see Supplementary data 1.
Full size image
We then tested how accurately M1 activity patterns could be decoded by downstream areas, such as the striatum.
We used four machine-learning decoding algorithms (nearest centroid classifier, multinomial logistic regression, linear discriminant analysis and support vector machines; Supplementary Table 3) to discriminate network responses to 20 different stimuli (Fig. 7a, d).
Binned spiking patterns from all pyramidal cells were densified using a random matrix to mimic highly convergent cortico-striatal information transfer and the resulting matrices were used as inputs to the classifiers.
The classifier accuracy at determining the stimulus identity was higher in control, DBS and SST opto-activation conditions relative to the parkinsonian condition; this result was consistent across the four classifiers (p < 0.001; Fig. 7d) and the efficacy of cortical interneurons opto-activation broke down for very high stimulation intensities, once pyramidal cells were too sparsely responsive to each stimulus (Supplementary Fig. 7c).
Thus, our modeling results indicate that reducing pyramidal cell hyperactivity by DBS or preferentially by SST opto-activation enables the cortical network to efficiently encode stimulus content and may facilitate the extraction of this information by downstream areas.
These results are robust to variations in the stimulation parameters (Supplementary Fig. 7) and choices of network parameters.
Importantly, the asymmetrical connectivity of SST interneurons with L5 pyramidal cells24 accounts for their higher efficiency at inhibiting pyramidal cells under DBS, when all three populations receive an external periodic pulse-shaped excitatory current; furthermore, this asymmetrical connectivity has important consequences in structuring the temporal dynamics of pyramidal cells under SST opto-activation as it does not impose an oscillatory-like pattern as PV opto-activation does in our model.
The childhood admonition to refrain from swimming for an hour after eating, ostensibly to avoid cramp, is not nearly long enough for me anymore.
I now have to wait at least two hours before attempting any vigorous activity, or chores that involve bending over, to avoid the miserable sensation of acid reflux, commonly recognized by its frequent symptom of heartburn.
I’ve also found that a favorite breakfast food — peanut butter — is especially troublesome, along with smoked fish, pickled herring or brewed coffee on an empty stomach.
How common is acid reflux?
Acid reflux is among the most frequent health complaints of American adults, and may have become even more common in the wake of pandemic-related stress and weight gain.
Late last year, pharmacies reported an unprecedented run on antacids by people described as having a “pandemic stomach,” leaving those with serious ailments that required such products often out of luck.
Even before the pandemic, an online survey from 2019 of more than 71,000 adults found that nearly a third reported that they were affected at least weekly by the discomforting symptoms of acid reflux, in which a small amount of stomach contents reverses course and backs up into the esophagus.
To determine whether you have COPD, and distinguish your symptoms from other conditions such as asthma, your doctor will ask you about your symptoms, perform a physical exam, and conduct certain lung function tests.
In addition to assessing your symptoms, your physician will want to know about other factors in your history that may make COPD more likely.
These factors include:
Smoking is by far the greatest risk factor for COPD.
About 80 to 85 percent of people with COPD have smoked cigarettes for a significant amount of time, says Edelman.
Smoking is the most common cause of COPD, accounting for as many as 8 out of 10 COPD-related deaths.
[6]
is by far the greatest risk factor for COPD.
About 80 to 85 percent of people with COPD have smoked cigarettes for a significant amount of time, says Edelman.
Smoking is the most common cause of COPD, accounting for as many as 8 out of 10 COPD-related deaths.
Lung irritants such as air pollution, airborne toxins, or chemical fumes can increase the risk for COPD, says Edelman.
Certain occupations that involve long-term exposure to inhaling dust may be a cause of COPD as well.
such as air pollution, airborne toxins, or chemical fumes can increase the risk for COPD, says Edelman.
Certain occupations that involve long-term exposure to inhaling dust may be a cause of COPD as well.
Family history of COPD and alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency, a genetic disorder, can increase the risk of COPD and other diseases.
If your body doesn’t make enough of the protein AAT, the lungs can be more easily damaged from smoking and environmental pollution.
[7] [8]
of COPD and alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency, a genetic disorder, can increase the risk of COPD and other diseases.
If your body doesn’t make enough of the protein AAT, the lungs can be more easily damaged from smoking and environmental pollution.
Persistent asthma and allergies are an important risk factor for COPD, says Edelman.
“Even people who haven’t smoked, if they’ve had asthma for a long time, it may change from asthma to COPD,” he says.
A physical exam is important to inspect the function of your lungs and heart, and look for other visible signs of COPD, such as cyanosis (blueness of the lips and fingernail beds).
“We can frequently hear the air obstruction when we listen to the chest,” says Edelman.
Your doctor may also ask you to blow into a device called a peak flow meter to assess your ability to exhale quickly and forcefully.
The Difference Between Asthma and COPD
[9] Asthma and COPD share two important symptoms: shortness of breath and cough.
There is a difference between the kinds of coughs found in the two conditions.
In chronic bronchitis, a type of COPD, a morning cough with phlegm is common, whereas in asthma people often have wheezing and chest tightness at night.
COPD is almost always associated with smoking; asthma can occur in both smokers and nonsmokers.
In asthma, when the airways tighten and you take medication, the airways go back to normal, says Edelman.
“In COPD, even though medication may relieve the airway tightening, they never quite go back to normal; the airways have changed in structure enough that you can’t open them up fully,” he says.
Share on Pinterest New research suggests that antiplatelet therapy and anticoagulants may help treat people with long COVID.
Tara Moore/Getty Images Scientists know little about the underlying mechanisms of long COVID despite widespread reports about it since near the start of the pandemic,
This lack of knowledge has made diagnosing and developing treatments for this condition challenging.
COVID-19 affects the lining of the blood vessels, and scientists have investigated whether long COVID symptoms could have links to this.
A team based in South Africa has released preliminary results of a treatment regime using antiplatelet therapy and anticoagulants to treat people with long COVID.
Coronavirus data All data and statistics are based on publicly available data at the time of publication.
Some information may be out of date.
Visit our coronavirus hub for the most recent information on COVID-19.
Was this helpful?
Long COVID describes the chronic and debilitating symptoms experienced by people with COVID-19 that last for more than 4 weeks after the resolution of the initial infection.
These symptoms include fatigue, shortness of breath and chest pain, cognitive problems, heart palpitations, insomnia, tinnitus, and joint pain.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has considered long COVID a disability since July 2021.
Most people with COVID-19 get better within 12 weeks, but scientists do not know how long the condition could last.
Nor do they know exactly how many people may develop long COVID.
However, estimates suggest over 20% of people who test positive for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, could continue to experience chronic symptoms.
Scientists have little understanding of the mechanisms behind the condition, which has made it difficult for them to develop treatments.
Last year, a team from Stellenbosch University in South Africa published results of blood plasma analysis, which revealed that many people with long COVID had microclots.
These microclots were difficult to detect using standard plasma analysis procedures and resisted the body’s ability to dissolve coagulated blood.
The scientists also found that the clots “trap” inflammatory molecules.
This work formed the basis of the so-called microclot model, which proposes that small clots in the blood capillaries that prevent oxygen from reaching the tissues may cause long COVID symptoms.
Coronavirus resources For more advice on COVID-19 prevention and treatment, visit our coronavirus hub.
Was this helpful?
The latest study Now, the same team has released a preprint outlining details of a further cohort of 845 people with long COVID.
The team analyzed blood samples from 70 people with confirmed long COVID to detect microclots.
The authors also outlined a 1-month-long dual antiplatelet therapy for 24 people with long COVID.
The therapy involved the participants taking 75 milligrams (mg) of Clopidogrel and 75 mg of Aspirin once each day before breakfast.
They also received 5 mg of the direct oral anticoagulant Apixiban twice daily and 40 mg each day of a proton pump inhibitor called Pantoprazole.
They took Pantoprazole half an hour before eating their main meal to protect the stomach.
The participants took these drugs under strict medical supervision to mitigate severe side effects.
The participants provided a list of symptoms before and after treatment, and the researchers took blood samples at the end of the month of treatment.
The team found that all 70 participants had microclots in their blood and that all 24 people who received the antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy reported improvements in their long COVID symptoms; they also saw a reduction of microclots.
We examined the associations between PTSD symptoms remission and sleep parameters in military-related PTSD subjects, and further compared them to a group of healthy military service members.
In support of our hypothesis, symptoms remission improved both subjective and objective sleep outcomes.
We showed that symptom remission after EMDR therapy was associated with significantly increased REMs number and density in REM sleep (Table 2).
To note some expected effects did not survive correction for multiple comparisons: TST and N2 stage duration were increased at T1, and an increased REMs density between T0 and T1 predicted a greater decrease of depression symptoms on the BDI scale.
We also observed a significant group effect on several sleep parameters which suggests that the symptoms remission did not completely normalize sleep in the patient group.
Finally, we report that some objective sleep measures at T0 are predictive of the number of EMDR therapy sessions required to reach symptoms remission.
The number and density of awakenings during SPT (as well as the duration and percentage of REM sleep before treatment, even though not significant after correction for multiple comparisons) was indeed significantly correlated with the number of EMDR sessions needed to reach remission.
Specifically, the number of EMDR sessions required for symptoms remission was positively correlated with more awakenings (and more REM sleep, but it did not survive after correction for multiple comparisons) before treatment (Fig. 2 and Table S2).
One week before therapy onset, sleep parameters of PTSD patients were consistent with previous literature on sleep disturbances in PTSD, i.e. shorter TST and N2 sleep, as well as lower subjective sleep quality compared to control individuals.
After remission from PTSD symptoms with EMDR therapy, both TST and duration of N2 sleep were no longer significantly different between groups, suggesting a normalization of sleep duration in patients (specifically N2 sleep) and REMs density was significantly increased.
These findings are consistent with a recent study on written narrative exposure therapy83.
In this study, which had no control group, PTSD participants showed longer total sleep time, higher percentage of N2 sleep and higher REMs density after therapy compared to before therapy.
However, caution must be exercised when comparing this latter study to the present one since they measured the PSG sleep parameters on the night following therapy, and not one week later as in our study.
Our results are also consistent with a previous study that showed an improvement of objective sleep measures in non-military-related PTSD patients treated with EMDR therapy43.
The sleep parameters that were improved following therapy are however different in the two studies since Raboni et al. reported only a decreased WASO after treatment (here also suggesting a normalization of sleep).
A possible explanation for the results discrepancy between studies is the relatively small sample size.
More surprisingly however, Raboni et al.43 also reported a non-significant higher REMs density before treatment in PTSD patients compared to the control group (Cohen d = 1.05), with little or no between-group difference after treatment (d = 0.16) due to reduction of REM density in PTSD patients, whereas we observed an evolution in the opposite direction i.e. a significantly higher REMs density in the PTSD group compared to the control group after treatment, with no between-group differences before treatment.
Our result is in line with the higher REMs density in PTSD patients following written narrative exposure therapy observed by Kobayashi et al.83.
However, they also reported that increased REM density was negatively associated with PTSD symptom reduction, while we observed the opposite correlation.
These differences of results may be due to the small sample size and to the control groups which may vary in their matching with the patients’ characteristics (i.e. age, profession) according to the different studies.
We also found significant group effects for a large number of objective sleep parameters, which are all in the direction of poorer sleep quality in PTSD patients than in the control group (e.g. lower efficiency and N3 sleep duration, higher percentage of N1 sleep, longer sleep latency, higher number of awakenings and stage transitions).
In other words, even if remission was associated with some improvements in TST and N2 sleep, PTSD patients did not reach a normalized sleep even when symptoms disappeared, which contrasts with the strong improvement in subjective sleep quality.
Exposure to trauma is associated with an integration of distressing and emotionally charged experiences into one’s autobiographical memory.
In PTSD, this lack of integration and depotentiation could be associated with an improper and non-adaptive over-consolidation of traumatic experiences84 underlying the intrusive and distressing nature of traumatic memories.
It is now well-established that sleep is essential for memory consolidation and emotional regulation of past events85.
Over the years, accumulated evidence has suggested that REM sleep and NREM sleep may serve distinct and complementary functions in memory consolidation86.
REM sleep has consistently been shown to support the specific consolidation of emotionally-salient memories87,88,89,90.
By contrast, NREM sleep is thought to support consolidation of non-emotional episodic memory91.
Specifically, during NREM sleep, relevant new memories are thought to be integrated and reorganized with respect to already existing experiences7.
In other words, the restoration of N2 sleep after symptoms remission suggested by several studies comprising ours, could restore the ability to integrate the traumatic event into autobiographical memory and thus prevent intrusions of traumatic memories.
On the other hand, REM sleep is thought to be important for depotentiating the affective tone of emotional memories92.
Specifically, emotional memories are thought to be reactivated during REM sleep by amygdala reactivations, causing a strengthening of the declarative, informational content of the memory and a decrease of the emotional reactivity to this memory90,92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99.
In line with this, the emotional intensity of waking life memories is attenuated in dreams in healthy subjects93,96 but not in PTSD patients for the traumatic event that caused the disorder.
In this study, we found that symptoms remission using EMDR increased the density of REMs in REM sleep.
Such increase in REMs density may favour traumatic memory integration and depotentiation during sleep as the eye movements of the EMDR therapy may favor this process at wake55.
Building on the fact that eye movements in both REM sleep and wakefulness activate similar cortical areas100, Stickgold proposed that eyes movements could be the process by which emotional depotentiation happens both during REM sleep and EMDR therapy.
According to this hypothesis, the alternating bilateral stimuli of EMDR would activate brain mechanisms that shift the brain into a memory processing mode similar to that of REM sleep.
This REM-like state would permit the integration of traumatic memories into associative cortical networks without interference from hippocampus-mediated episodic recall.
Our results are in line with this hypothesis, notably the correlation (non-significant after correction for multiple comparison) showing that the increased REMs density between T0 and T1 predicted a greater decrease of symptoms on the BDI scale.
Based on these findings and theoretical insights, we therefore propose that the to-be confirmed increase in duration in N2 sleep after symptoms remission could reflect the restored ability of PTSD patients to defend against traumatic memory intrusions, whereas the increase in REMs density could reflect a REM-related regulation mechanism rebound to decrease the emotional load of the traumatic memory.
Another important finding of this study was the positive correlation between the number of EMDR sessions needed to achieve remission in the PTSD group and sleep parameters before therapy, including a positive correlation with the number and density of intra-sleep awakenings (and also the percentage of REM sleep that did not survive after correction for multiple comparisons) (Fig. 2).
In other words, PTSD patients with higher density of intra-sleep awakenings and possibly longer REM sleep at baseline were also the ones that needed the more EMDR sessions to reach symptom remission.
This finding may indicate that having a great amount of intra-sleep awakenings (and possibly REM sleep) before treatment is maladaptive and/or reflect a failure of REM-sleep emotional regulation mechanisms.
Intra-sleep awakenings are known to be positively correlated with dream recall frequency81,101 which is correlated with nightmares frequency102.
Patients with the more intra-sleep awakenings may thus also be the ones with the more nightmare recall, and intra-sleep awakenings may interrupt the regulation process during REM sleep.
Bilateral alternating stimulation (BAS) during EMDR therapy could substitute this maladaptive or lack of emotional regulation process normally at play during REM sleep and participate in the emotional memory depotentiation and reconsolidation, via notably mental travel in time86,103,104, which also happens during dreaming since very old memories can be part of the dream scenery93,105.
In conclusion, our results show that remission from military-related PTSD (with EMDR therapy) is associated with an improvement of some sleep parameters, notably an increase of REMs density in REM sleep and possibly TST and N2 durations.
As it is argued in the literature that sleep-related memory consolidation may depend on several inter-dependant sleep stages86, it may be the case that remission in PTSD patients is explained by the combination of an increase in N2 duration and REMs density in REM sleep.
The increase in REMs density may require improved N2 to be efficient.
Future studies are warranted to further test this hypothesis and to improve our understanding of the neurophysiological mechanism responsible for symptom disparition in PTSD patients treated by EMDR therapy.
This is important to note that this study has some limitations.
The first limitation is that the control group consisted of healthy individuals without PTSD.
Our healthy control group has the advantage of providing us with normative sleep data in healthy subjects from the same profession, thus sharing the same environment and constraints as our patients.
One of its limitations is that the mean age of the EMDR group was higher than the one of the control group by an average of seven years, which may have biased group-comparison of sleep duration and quality, both known to decrease with age106.
Indeed, some of the above-described interactions and group effects were no longer significant when adjusting for age.
Future studies with larger sample sizes and age-matched groups are therefore needed to replicate our findings.
Another limitation of the study is related to the absence of a wait-list control group to ensure that the simple passage of time does not explain the effects observed, and of a PTSD group treated with another therapy to assess the specificity of the effect observed with the EMDR therapy.
Note however that the correlations between sleep parameters and the number of EMDR sessions needed to reach remission speak in favor of the specificity of the EMDR therapy.
Importantly, although the study design does not allow to establish whether the sleep changes observed are related to therapy vs the mere passage of time, it is unlikely that the passage of time explains our results.
Indeed, according to the DSM5 criteria, PTSD symptoms have to be present for more than one month for the disorder to be actually classified as DSM5.
And regarding more specifically the sleep symptoms, a study showed in 1995 that 59 to 73% of Vietnam veterans suffering from PTSD still had sleep disturbances such as insomnia and nonrestorative sleep i.e. in these patients the sleep disturbances had lasted at least for 20 years32.
Finally, it has been frequently observed in PTSD patients that sleep disturbances do not improve after otherwise successful first-line PTSD treatment24,26 and disturbed sleep is one of the two most reported residual symptoms26.
In line with these clinical observations, from a biological point of view numerous studies have demonstrated the chronic nature of sleep disorders in PTSD.
In 2019 Colvonen et al.107, demonstrated that sleep disturbances in 40 veterans with PTSD were unremitting without direct intervention, after a 3 months follow-up.
In other words, some further studies are needed to confirm our results and verify the specific effect of EMDR therapy on sleep parameters by using a wait-list control group, a non-PTSD-dedicated therapy or care, and another PTSD-dedicated therapy as exposure therapy or cognitive behavioral therapy trauma focused.
Another limitation is that our two groups were exclusively composed of male soldiers—mainly for practical reasons (as explained in the Methods).
Our findings should therefore not be generalized to female soldiers and/or non-military populations.
PTSD patients under psychotropic medication were included in the analysis if they were taking SSRIs only if the medication had stayed consistent for at least three months prior to and throughout the trial.
Recent meta-analyses showed that SSRIs may increase REM latency, suppress REM sleep and impair sleep continuity108,109.
At inclusion, however, the intensity of symptoms measured by the CAPS or the duration of REM did not differ between individuals taking SSRIs and those without psychotropic drugs.
Finally, the polysomnography recording devices were different between our two groups, and this may have artificially driven group differences in EEG-based spectral power and/or EOG-based REMs number and density.
We cannot exclude that some of the group differences observed in sleep parameters could be due to be different recording setting and experimental procedure for controls and patients, i.e. in-lab PSG with a constrained time in bed for the control group, versus at-home ambulatory PSG with no time constraint for the patient group.
However, this limitation cannot explain the time effect found in patients.
In summary, our findings show that remission from military-related PTSD with EMDR therapy is associated with an increase in REMs density during REM sleep and possibly with a normalization of total sleep duration, mostly driven by an increase of N2 sleep.
However, a wait-list group and another therapy PTSD therapy group is needed to confirm these results, and the specificity of the EMDR therapy on these effects.
Furthermore, we show that the number and density of intra-sleep awakenings before treatment are both predictive of the number of EMDR sessions required to reach remission.
It has now become clear that in addition to widely known symptoms with long COVID, such as difficulty concentrating or “brain fog,” that cardiac symptoms may occur as well.
These include chest pain, shortness of breath, syncope and palpitations.
Half the dues, all the AMA benefits!
AMA membership offers unique access to savings and resources tailored to enrich the personal and professional lives of physicians, residents and medical students.
Learn More
For some patients with COVID-19, cardiac symptoms may persist, lasting for months after their initial illness, according to consensus expert advice developed by the American College of Cardiology (ACC).
Published in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, the ACC panel created guidance to help physicians treating patients with myocarditis following SARS-CoV-2 infection or COVID-19 mRNA vaccination, as well as long COVID with cardiac involvement.
“The document was written to provide practical guidance about how best to evaluate and manage these conditions,” said co-chair of the ACC writing committee Ty J. Gluckman, MD.
He is a clinical cardiologist with the Providence Health System and medical director of the Center for Cardiovascular Analytics, Research, and Data Science at the Providence Heart Institute in Portland, Oregon.
“Our knowledge of this topic will definitely evolve over time, with the need for updates to provide more contemporary guidance,” said Dr. Gluckman.
“There’s a lot more science to come.”
The expert panel covered some ongoing questions faced by physicians and other health professionals caring for patients with long COVID and cardiovascular symptoms.
Related Coverage What doctors wish patients knew about long COVID
Take a systematic approach Take a systematic approach
Patients with long COVID may experience other cardiac symptoms such as elevated blood pressure, tachycardia out of proportion to that expected for effort, and drops in oxygen saturation.
But since long COVID is poorly understood and the underlying drivers may be diverse, a unifying explanation is often missing.
There is also a lack of data to help guide diagnosis, treatment and prognosis, the ACC panel said.
That is why a systematic approach to assist in the evaluation and management of long COVID is needed, especially since the evidence base is likely to evolve over time.
Patient-centered models of care are also needed to address long COVID.
This requires coordination by multidisciplinary teams that include primary care physicians, subspecialists such as pulmonologists, cardiologists, and neurologists, along with social workers, psychologists, and physical therapists.
The ACC guidance “is meant to be a practical resource that provides direction to the entire care team,” said Dr. Gluckman.
“We’ve attempted to develop a playbook that assists clinicians in how best to evaluate and manage cardiovascular symptoms related to long COVID, myocarditis and return to play.”
“It’s also really important to recognize that we are but one specialty,” he said.
“Team-based care—working with primary care, other specialists, and other members of the care team—is central in helping individuals with long COVID get better.”
Learn more from this AMA Journal of Ethics® personal narrative, “The Importance of Listening in Treating Invisible Illness and Long-Haul COVID-19.”
Divide heart symptoms into two groups Divide heart symptoms into two groups
Patients with long COVID heart symptoms should be split into two groups—patients with cardiovascular disease (CVD) and patients with a cardiovascular syndrome (CVS)—the latter of which is a heterogenous disorder that includes widely ranging cardiovascular symptoms not readily explained by testing, says the ACC guidance.
“As many as 10% to 30% may develop long COVID following SARS-CoV-2 infection.
In these individuals, symptoms such as chest pain, shortness of breath, and palpitations draw attention to the cardiovascular system,” said Dr. Gluckman.
Where possible, evaluation and management strategies for those with long COVID and cardiovascular disease, such as cardiomyopathy, ischemic heart disease or arrhythmia, should follow existing guideline recommendations.
“For some individuals, however, evaluation may fail to identify a specific etiology for their reported symptoms,” said Dr. Gluckman.
“Not surprisingly, this can be a source of tremendous frustration for patients and clinicians alike.”
Rather than focusing on a specific mechanism in these individuals—which may be a challenge to identify and address—the ACC guidance presents some of the most common cardiovascular symptoms observed with long COVID, mechanisms that may underlie them, and preferred approaches for evaluation and management.
“Unfortunately, there’s still so much that we don't know right now about this condition,” Dr. Gluckman said.
How to handle athletes’ return to play How to handle athletes’ return to play
For athletes with long COVID and ongoing cardiopulmonary symptoms—such as chest pain or tightness, dyspnea, palpitations, lightheadedness, or syncope—further evaluation should be performed before exercise can resume.
Others who are asymptomatic don’t require additional cardiac testing, says the ACC guidance.
It is likely that physicians will increasingly see asymptomatic athletes who are returning for sports physicals after having had COVID-19.
Regardless of the time that has passed since SARS-CoV-2 infection, athletes who remain asymptomatic, have not had cardiopulmonary symptoms and are exercising without limitation require no future cardiac testing.
But for athletes who had COVID-19 and a history of cardiopulmonary symptoms, how much time has passed since symptoms resolved and their current clinical status should dictate the doctor’s approach.
Guidance provided from the ACC panel is based on expert consensus and reflects the state of knowledge as of early this year.
The recommendations will likely change over time as evidence and understanding evolve.
Learn more from this JAMA®article, “The COVID Heart—One Year After SARS-CoV-2 Infection, Patients Have an Array of Increased Cardiovascular Risks.”
Visit the AMA COVID-19 resource center for clinical information, guides and resources, and updates on advocacy and medical ethics.
About 10% of people who have had COVID suffer from Parosmia, a smell disorder that distorts odors, according to a Wiley study in June.
TEXAS, USA — 3.5 million Texans have contracted COVID-19 and many of these people are still dealing with stubborn symptoms from the virus.
A common symptom is losing your sense of taste or smell.
A less common one affects about 10% of people who have had COVID according to a Wiley study in June.
It's called Parosmia, a smell disorder that distorts odors.
It can make things someone once loved smell and taste like sewage, garbage, gasoline, mold or ammonia - just to name a few.
Henderson resident Angela Johnson got COVID in late December.
She's still trying to recover her senses.
"I've sort of had to re-learn what things smell like...
A lot of things smelled like raw or rotting meat," she said.
Tyler resident Franklin Jones experienced the same thing.
His smell and taste have been off for nearly a year now after getting COVID in January.
He said, "Going out to restaurants with friends is pointless because you get knocked down by the smell when you walk in.
It's guttural.
It makes you gag.
"
He said food smelled like "rotting meat on top of a burning tire inside of an old salon where women were getting perms.
"
Verywell Health's Chief Medical Officer Dr. Jessica Shepherd explained it all starts in the olfactory system.
She said, "looking at the olfactory cells, which is our sense of smell cells that come in the upper nasal cavity, this is what we were able to see that was directly possibly attacked by the SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19.
"
The million-dollar question is how do you get rid of Parosmia?
Dr. Shepherd answered, "This is something that everyone would wish that they could know-
what can they avoid during an infection?
But with COVID-19, there really isn't a respecter of what actual symptom you're going to get.
"
If these symptoms sound familiar to you and especially if you've been experiencing them for more than 6 months, Dr. Shepherd recommends seeing an ear nose and throat specialist who could identify the severity of your case, and if there are any treatments or medications to help you restore your sense of smell and taste.
This article has been reviewed according to Science X's editorial process and policies .
Editors have highlighted the following attributes while ensuring the content's credibility:
The proportion of the different levels of Overall Improvement Index (OII) by group.
The blue bar represents proportion of participants with no improvement, the orangebar represents proportion of participants with improvements in one to two outcomemeasures, the gray bar represents proportion of participants with improvements inthree outcome measures and the dark yellow bar represents proportion of participantswith improvement in at least four outcome measures.
Credit: Journal of Attention Disorders (2023).
DOI: 10.1177/10870547231155877
Computerized Progressive Attention Training (CPAT), a new treatment developed at Tel Aviv University, significantly improved the symptoms of 33 percent of students suffering from Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
This is in comparison to an improvement in symptoms of only 11 percent of the students who participated in a parallel protocol of mindfulness training, during which the participants practiced a meditation designed to reduce their attention difficulties.
Furthermore, unlike drug treatment (such as Ritalin), these improvements were maintained even four months after the end of the treatment protocol.
The study was the doctoral dissertation of Dr. Pnina Stern, under the guidance of Prof. Lilach Shalev-Mevorach of Tel Aviv University's Constantiner School of Education.
The encouraging results of the study were recently accepted for publication in the Journal of Attention Disorders.
Prof. Shalev-Mevorach explains, "We developed the CPAT system years ago, and it did produce good results in previous studies that we conducted, mainly in children.
Furthermore, in the only study that we conducted in adults with ADHD, positive findings were obtained, but without indications of 'far transfer,' meaning an improvement in functions for which participants were not directly trained in the treatment.
"
Prof. Shalev-Mevorach points out that, in general, a scientific assertion based on far-transfer in a non-pharmacological intervention poses a great challenge for researchers, as there is no "non-pharmacological placebo" to compare to—that is, in the protocol of a non-pharmacological intervention, it is very difficult to separate the content of the intervention from environmental factors such as the attention the participants receive during the training sessions, the effort they invest in participating in the research, and so on.
In the current study, the team of researchers tried to resolve this by employing a research design that included two control groups: a regular control group, which performed the various assessment tasks at two points in time without any intervention as part of the research (the passive control group) and a second control group that participated in mindfulness training sessions under the guidance of a professional instructor.
This type of training has yielded positive results in previous studies in people with ADHD.
For the experiment, 54 male and female students were recruited from Tel Aviv University and other academic institutions who have been diagnosed with ADHD.
The subjects were blindly divided into three equal groups: a control group, a mindfulness group and a CPAT group.
Participants in the CPAT and the Mindfulness groups came to group meetings on the university campus once a week for two-hour sessions, where the CPAT group received Computerized Progressive Attention Training and the mindfulness group received training from a certified mindfulness instructor.
Before and after the intervention protocol, the participants of the three groups performed a comprehensive series of assessment tests: standard computerized tests to assess attention functions, behavioral assessment questionnaires (self-reported ADHD symptoms), and mindfulness questionnaires (self-reported feelings such as stress, anxiety and well-being).
In addition, a novel measurement was used for this intervention study, whose participants were, as mentioned, higher-education students: they were asked to read a text from a scientific article while their eye movements were tracked by an eye-tracker.
The indices produced using the eye-tracking system made it possible to identify a pattern of inattentive reading, which was used as a measure of reading efficiency in an academic context.
Finally, the participants filled out a questionnaire regarding their academic difficulties.
"The results were very positive," says Prof. Shalev-Mevorach.
"We saw improvements in the attention functions themselves, that is, 'near transfer,' for example in sustained attention, the ability to remain attentive for a long period of time, and in attention control, the ability to delay a routine response.
But the main thing is that we saw significant improvements in the participants' daily and academic functioning, such as reduced repeated reading while reading a scientific article.
"
"Furthermore, the improvements in these attention functions were connected to the reduction in behavioral symptoms of ADHD and in repetitive reading.
In other words, the CPAT trained the attention mechanisms themselves, and their improvement was related to the improvement achieved in behavioral symptoms and reading patterns.
"
"33 percent of the participants who received the CPAT protocol showed a significant improvement in ADHD symptoms, compared to only 11 percent of those who underwent the mindfulness protocol.
The improvements obtained were preserved in the the testing that was carried out about four months after the end of the intervention protocol.
"
Prof. Shalev-Mevorach concludes, "The effects of stimulant drugs (psychostimulants) such as Ritalin and Concerta are 'on-off.'
Studies show that patients who take Ritalin on a daily basis enjoy significant improvements, but when they stop the treatment, the improvements fade and they return to the starting point.
"
"Our motivation is to bring about a profound change in basic attention functions, a change that will be significant in the long term, as an additional option alongside medication, and of course as an alternative to drug treatment in cases in which it isn't applicable.
"
More information: Pnina Stern et al, Near and Far Transfer Effects of Computerized Progressive Attention Training (CPAT)
Versus Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) Practice Among Adults With ADHD, Journal of Attention Disorders (2023).
DOI: 10.1177/10870547231155877 Journal information: Journal of Attention Disorders
Today, research presented by Dr Weiqi Liao of the Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences has confirmed a further 21 signs of pancreatic cancer.
This includes two previously unrecognised symptoms – feeling thirsty and having dark urine.
The study has shown that patients often have some symptoms of the disease up to a year before their cancers are diagnosed, and other alarming symptoms three months before diagnosis.
Pancreatic cancer has the lowest survival among all common cancers, with five-year survival around 7% in the UK.
Unfortunately, most people with pancreatic cancer are diagnosed at a late stage.
Researchers want to better understand the early signs of pancreatic cancer because if patients and GPs are more aware of symptoms, they could be diagnosed earlier when their chance of survival is better.
The researchers hope their findings could improve survival by helping GPs diagnose the disease earlier, especially when patients present with several seemingly non-specific symptoms.
When pancreatic cancer is diagnosed earlier, patients have a higher chance of survival.
It is possible to diagnose patients when they visit their GP, but both patients and GPs need to be aware of the symptoms associated with pancreatic cancer - Dr Weiqi Liao
Led by Professor Julia Hippisley-Cox, the study looked at data from 24,236 patients who were diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in England between 2000 and 2017 using a large electronic database (QResearch).
The researchers looked at patients’ symptoms at different time points before they were diagnosed with cancer and compared them to other patients’ symptoms who were not diagnosed with pancreatic cancer.
The research, which is the largest study of its kind, found 23 symptoms linked with the diagnosis of PDAC (yellowing of the skin, bleeding in the stomach or intestine, problems swallowing, diarrhoea, change in bowel habits, vomiting, indigestion, abdominal mass, abdominal pain, weight loss, constipation, fat in stool, abdominal swelling, nausea, flatulence, heartburn, fever, tiredness, appetite loss, itching, back pain, thirst, and dark urine).
Nine symptoms were linked with PNEN (yellowing of the skin, blood in stool, diarrhoea, change in bowel habits, vomiting, indigestion, abdominal mass, abdominal pain, and weight loss).
While most symptoms were not specific to pancreatic cancer and could be due to other benign conditions, the researchers found patients diagnosed with pancreatic cancer had a higher chance of experiencing some of these non-specific symptoms one year before diagnosis.
These new findings enable us to conduct further work on understanding symptoms that could suggest pancreatic cancer.
This will help GPs to make decisions about who to refer for urgent tests, especially when patients have several seemingly non-specific symptoms.
- Dr Weiqi Liao
We thank the many hundreds of GPs using EMIS – an electronic patient record system widely used in the UK – who contribute anonymised data to the QResearch database, without whom this novel research in such a rare but important condition, would not have been possible.
- Professor Julia Hippisley-Cox
These results could now be used to update QCancer, a risk prediction model that has been created from the QResearch database to help GPs identify high-risk patients for further tests to diagnose cancer.
University of Oxford researchers are presenting their work at the NCRI Festival this week.
The NCRI Festival is running as a virtual event in place of this year’s NCRI Cancer Conference in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
It is taking place from 8 to 12 November 2021.
For more information visit https://conference.ncri.org.uk/.
Emily Walthall was a healthy 39-year-old woman enjoying life with her husband and their dogs when everything changed overnight.
The day after Thanksgiving 2021, she woke up with a weight on her chest.
“It was very abrupt.
It was very uncomfortable,” Walthall, a lawyer who lives in Brevard, North Carolina, recalls to TODAY.com.
“I felt like I couldn’t get a full breath and within a couple of days, I started coughing… Within a couple of weeks, I was coughing to the point that I would sometimes gag.”
She never had a fever or a sore throat.
But since Walthall would be visiting family for Christmas, she went to an urgent care a week before the holidays to get tested for COVID-19.
The result was negative.
Emily Walthall, now 40, shares a happy moment with her dogs.
Courtesy Emily Walthall
But the dry cough persisted so Walthall went to see her primary care doctor after Christmas.
X-rays of her chest showed opacities throughout both lungs and a mass in the upper right lobe.
A CT scan then confirmed “both of my lungs just looked like a mess,” she says.
Walthall was diagnosed with COVID-19 pneumonia, even though she never tested positive for the virus.
“I remember the primary care doctor saying to me, 'If you were ten years older and a smoker, we would have this mass in your upper right lobe biopsied right away.
But you don’t have cancer, you have pneumonia,’” she recalls.
He was wrong.
'If you have lungs, you can get lung cancer'
When Walthall didn’t respond to a course of strong antibiotics, she had a follow-up CT scan in February 2022.
Logging onto her online chart that night, she saw the results warning that the changes in her lungs “should be considered malignant,” she recalls.
More scans plus a biopsy revealed the true diagnosis: stage 4 non-small cell lung cancer that had spread to her spine and brain.
Walthall and her husband were shocked and devastated.
“I certainly did not have any thought that it could be cancer.
I thought only people who smoke get lung cancer, which I never had,” she says.
That belief persists when she tells others about her diagnosis: “Everyone assumes that I’m a smoker,” she notes.
About 15% of lung cancer patients have never smoked, says Dr. Jared Weiss, an oncologist at UNC Health in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, who is treating Walthall.
“If you have lungs, you can get lung cancer,” Weiss tells TODAY.com.
“Nobody deserves lung cancer, whether they’ve smoked or not.”
A DNA mutation can cause lung cancer in non-smokers, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
It’s like an error in the cell’s instruction manual, leading the cell to forget how to do its job and instead make copies of itself, spread and grow, Weiss says.
Some of these mutations can be just bad luck, he adds.
The tissue taken from Walthall’s lungs during her biopsy underwent next generation sequencing to discover whether she had such a mutation.
It turned out Walthall had an RET gene rearrangement, which appears in about 1% to 2% of lung cancer patients, according to the American Lung Association.
This leads to the production of abnormal RET proteins, which drive the growth of cancer cells, the National Cancer Institute explains.
It meant Walthall would benefit from targeted therapy known as selpercatinib or Retevmo, which blocks the activity of these proteins.
She recalls Weiss telling her, “You have RET.
We have a great medicine for this.
I’m so happy for you.”
Weiss says he was pleased because the targeted therapy is the most active against the cancer while also the least toxic treatment possible.
This was Walthall's first hike after being able to come off her oxygen tank in the spring of 2022.
She was with her husband, Elliott, in Joyce Kilmer Memorial Forest in North Carolina.
Courtesy Emily Walthall
Walthall takes three pills in the morning and at night with limited side effects such as dry mouth.
Before she started taking the drug in March 2022, she had labored breathing and couldn’t walk upstairs because of the cancer.
Five days after she received the first dose, she stopped coughing.
At three months, scans showed there was significant tumor reduction and no evidence of cancer in her brain.
The lesions on her spine have been healing and she has remained stable since.
"I was blowing these floats up at a friend's bachelorette party (last summer) and didn't realize how much stronger my lungs were," Walthall says.
"I just started blowing them up and didn't think anything about it.
Another friend stopped to ask to take my picture.
It was very emotional."
Courtesy Emily Walthall
“You would have no idea if I didn’t tell you that I have a serious disease,” Walthall says.
“Today, physically, my energy is as it was before.
I exercise like I did before.
The biggest challenge is emotional and psychological — just living with a serious disease for which there is not a cure.
"
The targeted therapy may eventually stop working as the cancer learns to evade it.
But that may take years and if the cancer is progressing slowly, it may not pose a threat to a patient’s well-being, Weiss says.
Radiation can target spots that are more threatening.
A next-generation RET inhibitor is being tested, so there’s already a plan B even before considering the option of chemotherapy, he adds.
Preventing lung cancer
Cigarette smoking is the No. 1 cause of lung cancer, according to the CDC, so if you smoke, it’s important to stop, Weiss says.
Talk to your primary care doctor about lung cancer screening with an annual low dose CT scan.
It’s recommended for current and former smokers 50 and older.
Radon, a naturally occurring invisible odor-free gas, is the second leading cause of lung cancer, the CDC notes.
Weiss urged people to test their homes for the presence of radon with inexpensive kits.
Indoor cooking fumes are also a risk for lung cancer, but less so in the U.S. where homes are built to have good ventilation, he notes.
But even if you’re doing everything right, lung cancer can still strike, as Walthall found out.
“If you have lungs, you’re breathing all the time, which means that you’re constantly breathing in things that can cause cancer — that’s unavoidable.
Our planet is polluted, and even if it weren’t, even oxygen can cause a mutation or two,” Weiss says.
Watch for lung cancer symptoms such as coughing that gets worse or doesn’t go away; chest pain, shortness of breath, fatigue and unexplained weight loss.
Billie Eilish has Tourette's syndrome, a brain disorder characterized by repetitive and involuntary sounds and motions.
The singer spoke about her tics in a recent interview with David Letterman.
She said her most frequent tics aren't obvious to others, but they're "very exhausting" for her.
Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily.
Read preview Thanks for signing up!
Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go.
download the app Email address Sign up By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy .
You can opt-out at any time.
Advertisement
Billie Eilish has been open about having Tourette syndrome since she shared her diagnosis on Instagram in 2018.
The 20-year-old singer spoke about her experience with the tic disorder in a recent interview with David Letterman for his Netflix series, "My Next Guest Needs No Introduction.
"
In the interview, Eilish appeared to look away from Letterman when he asked her a question.
She explained that she was "ticcing" due to her Tourette's, which causes repetitive and involuntary movements or sounds.
This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers.
Become an Insider and start reading now.
Have an account?
Log in .
Share on Pinterest Yoga offers many benefits, and new research shows the practice may help alleviate symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis.
Maskot/Getty Images A new study showed the positive impact of yoga on rheumatoid arthritis.
Specifically, it helped maintain cell homeostasis.
Gentle yoga is recommended for people with RA, but other styles could be modified with props under the guidance of a qualified yoga therapist or instructor.
Despite the promising results, the study was small in size and short in duration.
More research is needed to determine the benefits of yoga for RA symptoms.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease that occurs when the body’s immune system attacks its own tissues.
The condition causes joint inflammation and pain and over time, may lead to bone erosion and joint deformity.
One of the primary markers of RA is an imbalance of pro-inflammatory T helper 17 (Th17) cells and anti-inflammatory regulatory T (Treg) cells.
This is referred to as Th17/Treg cell imbalance.
While there is no cure for RA, a new study published in Scientific Reports demonstrated the positive effects of yoga on molecular factors like the modulation of the T cell subsets, T cell aging markers, epigenetic alterations, and transcription factors associated with the condition.
Results showed that 8 weeks of practicing yoga greatly lowered disease activity, stabilized inflammation-related biomarkers, and maintained Th17/Treg cell homeostasis.
“The study is compelling because it dives into the molecular mechanisms by which yoga could help alleviate the symptoms of RA,” Dr. Monisha Bhanote, integrative medicine lifestyle physician, told Medical News Today.
“This goes beyond symptomatic relief and looks into how yoga impacts the immune system, particularly the Th17/Treg cell balance, which is known to be disrupted in RA.”
Dr. Bhanote was not involved in the current study but explained that the research examined gene expression patterns and epigenetic markers.
This exploration led to a better understanding of how yoga could aid in treating RA.
Thus, the study provides a scientific basis for integrating yoga as an adjunct therapy in RA treatment plans.
How could yoga improve treatment for rheumatoid arthritis?
The study’s findings could lead to further research into specific elements of yoga most effective in treating RA, Dr. Bhanote said.
Additionally, experts note the study could pave the way for healthcare professionals to recommend yoga as a complementary treatment to standard disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs).
Dr. Nikki Tugnet, a rheumatologist and yoga teacher, not involved in the study, told MNT: “The study offers molecular evidence for yoga as an adjunct to standard of care, which opens up the exciting possibility of healthcare providers recommending yoga programs with treatment.
Of note, the 2022 American College of Rheumatology for Integrative Approaches to Treatment of RA guidelines suggest that Mind-Body modalities may be effective in RA; this study adds significant credence.”
Dr. Ahmed Elghawy, staff physician in the Orthopaedic and Rheumatologic Institute at the Cleveland Clinic, also not involved in the research, told MNT: “I find that a widely available, noninvasive lifestyle modification can significantly impact rheumatoid disease activity from a clinical and immunologic standpoint.
This can give clinicians a better roadmap in prescribing specific exercises in addition to treating with standard-of-care medications for rheumatoid arthritis.”
What styles of yoga are recommended for RA?
There are many health benefits to practicing yoga, but not all types of yoga may be suitable for people with RA.
Gentle styles of yoga may be best for people with the condition, but other styles of yoga may adapted and modified to support an individual’s abilities.
Dr. Elghaway and Dr. Tugnet made the following recommendations: Hatha yoga
Iyengar yoga
Yin yoga
restorative yoga
chair yoga
“These forms emphasize alignment, slow movement, and controlled breathing, which can be beneficial for individuals with mobility limitations,” Dr. Elghawy said.
Many physical yoga postures (asanas) may be practiced with the support of props.
According to Dr. Tugnet, helpful yoga postures for RA include: Seated Mountain Pose (Tadasana)
Wind Relieving (or Joint Freeing) Pose (Pawanmuktasana)
Reclined Butterfly Pose (Supta Baddha Konasana)
Legs-up-the-Wall (or Chair) Pose (Viparita Karani) “Yoga for RA should be safe, supported, and accessible,” Dr. Tugnet said.
That’s why it’s a good idea to work with a qualified yoga therapist or instructor with knowledge of RA or related conditions.
Dr. Bhanote recommended the following yoga poses for RA: Child’s Pose (Balasana)
Cat-Cow Pose (Marjaryasana-Bitilasana)
Tree Pose (Vriksasana)
Gentle Supine Twist (Supta Matsyendrasana) “Remember, the best type of exercise is the one you can enjoy on a regular basis — and the same goes for yoga,” Dr. Elghawy explained.
Be sure to talk with your doctor about the benefits of yoga for RA before starting a new exercise regimen.
How does meditation impact RA symptoms?
Traditionally, regardless of style or intensity, yoga should include elements of mindfulness and meditation since it is a mind-body practice.
Research has shown that meditation helps lower physical biomarkers associated with stress.
“Stress can have negative effects on immune regulation and can often increase the risk of flares,” Dr. Elghawy said.
“As seen in this study, it appeared that in addition to yoga, meditation, and relaxation techniques increased protective T reg cells and decreased inflammatory Th17 cells, which can translate to improved symptoms and less flares.”
As demonstrated by the present study, yoga was found to have a significant impact on T-cell subsets, markers of T-cell aging, and inflammatory markers, Dr. Bhanote stated.
Specifically, yoga helped balance the Th17/Treg cell population, thereby maintaining immune homeostasis.
Additionally, a 2022 study found that yoga, mindfulness, and meditation improved symptoms in subjects with RA.
The stress reduction aspects of yoga could have additional benefits in reducing inflammation, although more research is still needed to confirm this.
More studies on the benefits of yoga for RA needed Dr. Bhanote said the study has a few limitations worth mentioning.
Sample size: The study had a relatively small sample size (n=64), limiting the findings’ generalizability.
The study had a relatively small sample size (n=64), limiting the findings’ generalizability.
Duration:
The study followed participants for only 8 weeks, which may not be long enough to determine the long-term efficacy of yoga practice in RA management.
The study followed participants for only 8 weeks, which may not be long enough to determine the long-term efficacy of yoga practice in RA management.
Lack of control for other variables: While the study accounted for patients already on DMARDs, it’s unclear how well other lifestyle variables (diet, other forms of exercise, stress, etc.) were controlled for.
While the study accounted for patients already on DMARDs, it’s unclear how well other lifestyle variables (diet, other forms of exercise, stress, etc.) were controlled for.
Specificity of yoga program: The study did not specify which type of yoga was used, how often classes were taken, or how strenuous the yoga routines were, making it challenging to replicate the study or recommend specific yoga practices for RA patients.
Dr. Elghawy agreed there are other lifestyle factors to take into consideration: “It is difficult to know if those in the yoga group were also doing other lifestyle improvements that could improve Treg ang Th17 levels.
Those who engage in healthy activities tend to incorporate other healthy lifestyle changes as well and this could have been overlooked.”
Dr. Tugnet also noted a few limitations, namely the skewed disease severity between groups.
She noted there were more participants with moderate RA disease activity at baseline in the non-yoga group and more with high disease activity in the yoga group.
Interventions may be more noticeably effective where disease activity is high, Dr. Tugnet explained.
New strains of Coronavirus continue to appear in several parts of the world.
A new variant, BA.2.86, is being carefully monitored by health officials around the world due to the large number of mutations it carries.
So far, cases of BA.2.86 have been recorded in Israel, Denmark, the United Kingdom, and the United States, according to the global virus tracker GISAID.
The spread is very small at the moment.
A popular attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) coach has revealed five surprising behaviors that could be red flags.
Kelly Baum, who was diagnosed with ADHD in adulthood, recently went viral on TikTok sharing her own experience — and the habits she never knew were symptoms of something deeper.
One common behavior in people with the disorder, Baum explained, is listening to the same song on repeat until they have “drawn all the emotion out” of the song and “are sick of it.”
She also said that procrastinating on small tasks that would likely only take a few minutes to check off the to-do list is a symptom of ADHD.
“Even though you know it will literally take you five minutes, you cannot get yourself to do it,” she described.
“No matter how hard you try or no matter how many times people tell you, ‘Just do it,’ you can’t.”
3 One surprising symptom of ADHD is getting the “opposite” intended effect from drinking coffee.
Getty Images/iStockphoto
The expert also shared that constantly running into furniture is another habit people with the chronic condition repeat.
“ADHD and neurodivergence can impact your proprioception, which is your awareness of the position and movement of your body,” Baum explained.
3
An attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) coach has revealed five surprising behaviors that could lead to a diagnosis.
AndreyPopov
People who suffer from ADHD may also have a strange relationship with coffee, where the beverage creates the “opposite” of the intended effect — actually making them more tired.
“This has to do with the fact they have a lower dopamine level.
When you drink coffee, it raises your dopamine levels and things even out
and you feel a little bit more relaxed, kind of like a stimulant medication dose,” Baum said.
To round out the list, Baum shared that people with ADHD will sit in the car for a long period of time after arriving at a destination.
“This is because they often struggle with switching tasks.
It’s like you’ve got to work yourself up for it,” she explained.
Baum wasn’t diagnosed with ADHD until she was 30 years old and actively shares insights about the neurobehavioral disorder to encourage others to get diagnosed or help them through it.
“Honestly my mind was blown when I found out about these after my late diagnosis,” she captioned the video.
3 Women and girls with ADHD are less likely to receive a proper diagnosis for their symptomatic behavior.
Getty Images
ADHD is the most common neurodevelopmental disorder, with an estimated 6 million children, 3 to 17 years old, having ever been diagnosed, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Doctors explained to Women’s Health that women are statistically more likely to have symptoms overlooked and go undiagnosed, but they warned that licensed professionals should be giving the diagnosis — not armchair “experts” on social media.
Still, a startling amount of women are diagnosing themselves with neurodivergent conditions such as ADHD after watching trending TikTok videos.
The social media app has also been accused of allowing a wave of startups to capitalize on loosened drug regulations to promote and sell prescription medications for ADHD like Adderall and Vyvanse, raising ethical and legal questions from doctors.
For most people, COVID-19 symptoms start off in the same manner.
However, the severity is most likely noticed by Day 5, for those susceptible to the same.
The severity induced in cases for most people happens due to the cytokine storm, which causes the immune system to unleash lethal autobodies which turn on the healthy cells.
For some, the severity could be factored to their genetic predisposition or liable comorbidities.
Nonetheless, what most doctors believe is that timely medical help can save lives.
It's also important to learn and recognize the symptoms which can turn your mild COVID-19 case into a severe one.
Oxygen deprivation, breathlessness, vital organ complications can all be serious warning signs that one needs to be hospitalized.
According to Dr Mathew Varghese, St. Stephens Hospital, Delhi and an eminent scholar, the severity and the warning signs of severe COVID-19 could be recognized in the initial week of infection onset and hence, timely intervention is critical.
Apart from a dip in oxygen levels, chest pain or breathlessness, these are also some potential warning signs to check for in the initial days, which can predict the severity of your disease:
Kidney Stone Symptoms: An Overview
Kidney stones or renal calculi are among the most prevalent urinary ailments.
It leads to the formation of robust fragments made from calcium oxalate ranging from minute particles to that of a golf ball.
While minute stones pass off naturally by urine, larger stones lead to profuse discomfort.
Men are more prone to developing early signs of kidney stones than women.
If you experience painful urination or frequent lower back pain, it might indicate underlying UTIs or existing nephroliths.
Check out this blog to learn more about potential kidney stone symptoms.
10 Signs of Kidney Stones
You may need a kidney stone diagnosis if you experience one or more of the following symptoms usually found in patients with renal calculi.
These include:
1.
Sharp Lower Abdominal Trauma
Unlike muscular inflammation, underlying kidney stones lead to excruciating pain that spreads around the lower abdomen.
It exists like sharp waves of contraction and may move around the colic flexures.
Lower abdominal pain is a primary kidney stone symptom.
It confirms the presence of massive renal calculi that causes pain when moving around the kidney near the intestinal region.
2.
Profuse Discomfort
While Urination
Kidney stones can lead to dysuria or painful urination.
You may also experience a sharp burning sensation because renal calculi lead to inflammation from failing to pass from the ureters to the urinary bladder.
It's also a sign of underlying UTIs.
If you feel prolonged discomfort when urinating, consult a urologist for a kidney stone diagnosis.
3.
Abnormal Micturition
If your kidney contains renal calculi, it can cause obstructive urination.
This can lead to irregular or low urine output, meaning you may need to frequent the washroom at odd intervals.
You may also experience an inability to contain urine for long periods.
It could indicate both signs of kidney stones and underlying UTIs.
4.
Presence of Blood in the Urine
Most patients with intestinal and urinary infections pass blood with the urine.
Also known as haematuria, it's impossible to detect by the naked eye but includes a marked brown colour of urine distinct from its natural yellowish tint.
Remember, haematuria is a common symptom of various ailments like prostate cancer, kidney malfunction, and underlying circulatory issues.
If you experience pinkish or reddish urine, promptly contact your physician for a kidney stone diagnosis.
5.
Foul Odour and Cloudy Urine Texture
Natural urine is crystalline, which means you will not detect a hazy texture upon release.
Kidney stone symptoms lead to pyuria, meaning pathogenic presence in the urine, leading to cloudiness.
Foul urine odour is abnormal and indicates renal calculi, among other complications.
While urine stench may suggest liver ailments, it's different from foul odour arising from bacterial decomposition of urea.
6.
Unable to Urinate From Blockage of UT
Kidney stone symptoms also include blockage of the ureters, a pair of smooth muscular tubes that transfer filtered urine from collecting ducts to the urinary bladder.
It leads to abnormal urine flow, which is different from bladder dysfunction.
Remember, ureter blockage can be fatal as it leads to toxic accumulation of urea in the kidney, best understood through little or no micturition in the last 24 hours.
7. Unexplained Inflammation
Kidney stones can lead to pyuria, that is, an abundance of pathogens in your body.
It shall lead to sudden fever or body inflammation with abdominal pain, making it among the prominent signs of kidney stones.
If you experience recurrent fever with urinary discomfort, it could suggest renal calculi in addition to UTIs.
Consult a urologist before consuming antipyretics to reduce your fever.
8.
Frequent Nausea
Individuals with GI infections experience frequent nausea and vomiting tendencies.
It could also be among kidney stone symptoms since renal calculi passing around the kidney can trigger shared nerves that cause stomach upset.
If you experience nausea with recurrent lower back inflammation, seek clinical consultation for prompt diagnosis before trying OTC medications.
9.
Inflammation Around Reproductive Organs
Besides abdominal pain, signs of kidney stones include reproductive organ inflammation in both men and women.
It happens if renal calculi inflammation reaches the testicular wall (men) and irritation in the labia and vulva (women).
It also leads to irregular discharge in females, besides recurrent pain in the groin region.
These signs are also similar among patients with UTIs, making it essential to seek consultation with a urologist to know accurately about your condition.
10.
Translocation of Abdominal Pain
Lower-back abdominal pain is among the vital signs of kidney stones.
Furthermore, the pain is not static like muscular cramps but moves around as the renal calculi pass through the kidney, triggering various nerves in the vital region.
The pain can shift near your lower ribs or spread out to reproductive organs, imparting a feeling of unknown roaming objects.
Abdominal pain is a common symptom of many ailments.
Irrespective of your existing condition, please consult a doctor to get diagnosed for underlying complications before consuming medications.
Conclusion
Kidney stones symptoms are health complications from underlying anomalies like kidney stones, gastrointestinal issues, and an oxalate-rich diet.
A treatable condition, this can resolve naturally if renal calculi stones are small.
If you experience the above symptoms, it suggests large nephroliths obstructing the urinary tract, meaning you need prompt clinical support.
A urologist would suggest multiple pathological tests to measure calcium levels in your blood.
Would you like a home collection of blood samples?
Metropolis Lab provides seamless test sample collection through trained technicians (phlebotomists) who forward them for evaluation at state-of-the-art diagnostic laboratories.
Do you have frequent micturition troubles?
Consult with a urologist today to get checked for signs of kidney stones.
If you need a customized pathological package for in-house sample collection, check out the best offers from Metropolis Lab.
One more thing which is a sign of Dengue shock syndrome is bleeding under the skin, which might look like bruising
Image Source : Instagram/sf_xrloc
Share on Pinterest Scientists are working on new treatments to prevent lupus symptoms and reverse its effects.
VICTOR TORRES/Stocksy Lupus is a life-altering, incurable autoimmune disorder that can result in death in extreme cases.
The best doctors can do for people with lupus is to attempt to address and manage its symptoms and try to prevent permanent harm to the body.
At a recent gathering, Bristol Myers Squibb presented research describing a new pill that can treat lupus and reverse the damage it causes.
Lupus is a chronic autoimmune condition that attacks healthy tissue.
It can cause episodes of fatigue, pain, or swelling in the joints, skin rashes, headaches, sensitivity to light, and chest pain while breathing in deeply.
In extreme cases, it can be fatal when it causes damage to internal organs.
No cure exists for lupus.
Physicians deploy an array of therapies aimed at lessening its symptoms and reducing the damage it can cause.
At the American Chemical Society’s Fall 2022 meeting on August 21, 2022, Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS) presented the results of promising research regarding a pill BMS hopes will be able to directly treat systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
SLE is the most common form of lupus.
The new pill is called afimetoran, and it has reduced lupus-like symptoms, reversed organ damage, and prevented fatalities in mice.
BMS has begun phase 2 human clinical trials of afimetoran.
Phase 2 trials test a drug’s effectiveness and side effects.
About lupus Albert Roy is currently executive director of Lupus Therapeutics of the Lupus Research Alliance, and will become president and CEO of the Alliance in September 2022.
He described the effects of SLE to Medical News Today: “Up to 90% of people with lupus will have inflammation or swelling of the joint lining, causing stiffness and pain, most often in the hands and wrists.
Most people with SLE experience unexplained fevers.”
Fatigue from lupus, Roy noted, can be “severe enough to significantly impact patients’ quality of life, including lessening their ability to function at home or at work.”
“About half of people with lupus experience a red ‘malar’ rash that may appear across the cheeks and bridge of the nose in the shape of a butterfly or on other parts of the body, and can be painful or itchy.
Because many people with lupus are photosensitive, skin rashes often first develop or worsen after being out in the sun.”
— Albert Roy, executive director of Lupus Therapeutics Lupus can also lead to cardiovascular disease, kidney disease and stroke.
“Specifically,” said Roy, “people with lupus are at an increased risk for atherosclerosis — the deposition of fats and cholesterol [plaque] along the lining of the arterial wall.
In some people, inflammation can occur in the heart itself (myocarditis and endocarditis) or the membrane that surrounds it.
Endocarditis can damage heart valves, which can result in heart murmurs.”
“When the disease affects the kidneys, it’s called lupus nephritis, and patients generally require intensive drug treatment to prevent permanent damage.
Lupus also may attack the brain or central nervous system, which can cause seizures or stroke,” he continued.
Adding to the challenge of addressing lupus’ symptoms, said Roy, is that, “There is no single test to definitively diagnose lupus, and it could take months or even years to be sure.”
Diagnosing lupus “Typically, your doctor will conduct a complete medical history and physical exam, including blood tests.
The doctor may also perform skin and kidney biopsies (extracting tissue samples that are then examined under a microscope) to make a diagnosis.”
— Albert Roy, executive director of Lupus Therapeutics The other common types of lupus, Roy said, are: Cutaneous lupus, which causes a rash or lesion on the skin, usually when exposed to sunlight
Drug-induced lupus, similar to SLE, which is caused by an overreaction to certain medications.
Symptoms usually disappear once the medication is stopped.
Neonatal lupus, which occurs when an infant acquires autoantibodies from its mother with SLE.
How afimetoran works against lupus Afimetoran inhibits the function of cellular proteins TLR7 and TLR8.
TLR7 and TLR8 trigger the immune system, usually in response to foreign RNA.
However, in people with lupus, they activate the immune system when they mistake the individual’s own RNA as a threat, causing a range of lupus symptoms.
“It is well-documented, said Roy, “that aberrant activation of TLR7/8 is potentially pathogenic and linked to the progression of certain autoimmune diseases such as lupus.
Prior efforts to develop inhibitors of TLR7/8 have been largely unsuccessful because of the challenge of producing a small-molecule inhibitor for these difficult targets.”
Dr. Alaric Dyckman, director at Bristol Myers Squibb, recalled an important finding from their research.
“The first remarkable finding was the identification of small molecules that could bind directly to TLR7 and TLR8 and inhibit their function, confirming these as valid drug targets for this modality,” he told MNT.
BMS identified the molecules by screening the company’s massive collection of compounds for any that might block TLR 7 and 8.
Dr. Dyckman described BMS’ collection: “The compound collection is a physical inventory of a large number of purified samples that has been curated over many years and is carefully stored for ongoing use.
The samples of the collection come from internally prepared materials, as well as samples purchased from external sources.
For the TLR screen, 1.25 million samples from this collection were tested for their inhibitory ability in cellular assays.”
Inhibiting TLR 7 and 8 should not pose new problems, felt Dr. Dyckman: “TLR7 and TLR8 function as part of the innate immune system, providing surveillance against pathogens.
They are not alone in that role, and a range of other proteins in the body serve similar and overlapping protective functions.
That redundancy supports the idea that an inhibitor of TLR7 and TLR8 could be administered without undue concern of broad immunosuppression.”
Testing afimetoran in mice “For mouse models of lupus, we were able to show that not only could we prevent the development of lupus-like symptoms in the animals receiving our compound treatment prior to disease onset,
[but] we could [also] actually reverse the symptoms in animals that had established disease, preventing the lethality that is associated with these very challenging models,” Dr. Dyckman said.
“Reversal such as this had not been demonstrated with other mechanisms that we had evaluated in the animal models of disease prior to this work,” he added.
The researchers also found that afimetoran worked well alongside corticosteroid treatments in in vitro studies and in mice.
This is important because physicians often prescribe such steroids to address lupus’ inflammatory symptoms.
Uganda health authorities have declared an outbreak of Ebola disease.
Ebola outbreaks emerge periodically in several African countries, most notably in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).
Public health expert Yap Boum, who has been involved in managing Ebola outbreaks in the past, answers some key questions about Ebola’s history, treatment, and how to keep safe.
What are the origins of the virus?
Ebola is an old and deadly disease that was discovered in 1976 near the Ebola river in northern DRC.
The virus was named after the river.
It was discovered by scientists including Jean-Jacques Muyembe – a Congolese microbiologist and general director of the DRC Institut National pour la Recherche Biomedicale – and researchers from the Institute of Tropical Medicine, including Stefaan Pattyn, Guido van der Groen and Peter Piot.
Professor Muyembe was called to the village of Yambuku in northern Zaire (now DRC) where a mysterious illness had broken out.
He took a sample and sent it to the Institute of Tropical Medicine laboratory in Belgium, where the virus was isolated.
Since then, there have been five identified Ebola virus strains, four of which are known to cause disease in humans: Ebola virus (Zaire ebolavirus); Sudan virus (Sudan ebolavirus); Taï Forest virus (Taï Forest ebolavirus, formerly Côte d'Ivoire ebolavirus); and Bundibugyo virus (Bundibugyo ebolavirus).
It’s a zoonotic disease (animal-borne) though the natural reservoir host of Ebola virus remains unknown.
However, bats are the most likely reservoir.
What are the symptoms of Ebola?
While the signs and symptoms may appear between 2 and 21 days after contact with the virus, they usually appear between 8 and 10 days.
They are quite similar to many tropical diseases, especially malaria and typhoid fever, with which they share symptoms such as:
fever
aches and pains, such as severe headache and muscle and joint pain
weakness and fatigue
sore throat
loss of appetite
abdominal pain
diarrhoea and vomiting
unexplained haemorrhaging, bleeding or bruising.
The main differences appear in the late stages of infection.
These symptoms might include red eyes, skin rash and hiccups.
Can it be treated?
The Ebola virus disease can now be treated.
The PALM clinical trial – implemented between 2018 and 2020 in the DRC – has evaluated four drug candidates.
Two of them – Inmazeb and Ebanga – were approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in October and December 2020 to treat the Ebola virus disease caused by the Ebola virus.
They are made available to patients by the World Health Organization (WHO) during Ebola outbreaks and aren’t available in the market.
Inmazeb is a combination of three monoclonal antibodies and Ebanga is a single monoclonal antibody.
Monoclonal antibodies (often abbreviated as mAbs) are proteins produced in a lab or other manufacturing facility that act like natural antibodies to stop a germ such as a virus from replicating after it has infected a person.
Ebanga was isolated from a human survivor of the 1995 Ebola outbreak in Kikwit in the DRC who maintained circulating antibodies against the Ebola virus for more than a decade after infection.
Without treatment the average case fatality rate is approximately 50%.
But it has ranged from 25% to 90% in past outbreaks.
Can it be prevented?
People can be vaccinated against one strain, the Zaire Ebola virus.
It became a preventable disease following the validation of one vaccine candidate during the Ca Suffit Ebola clinical trial in 2015 in Guinea.
The Ebola vaccine rVSV-ZEBOV (called Ervebo®) was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in December 2019.
This vaccine is given as a single dose vaccine and has been found to be safe and protective with a reported 100% efficacy.
Though it has not yet been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration, Johnson & Johnson has a two-dose vaccine for the Zaire strain that was used under emergency use in 2019 during an Ebola outbreak in the DRC.
This vaccine requires an initial dose and a “booster” dose 56 days later and could be made available through the WHO during outbreaks.
How can you protect yourself?
Ebola is a highly transmissible disease but, aside from vaccination for the Zaire strain, its spread can be prevented through behavioural measures.
People should avoid contact with blood and body fluids – such as urine, faeces, saliva, sweat, vomit, breast milk, amniotic fluid, semen and vaginal fluids – of people who are sick.
People should also avoid contact with their personal items which might have traces of these fluids.
People who were previously infected can still carry the disease in their semen.
Read more:
Ebola survivors can pass on the virus: we're trying to understand what role sex plays
Because it’s a zoonotic disease – that is, transmitted from animal to humans – people should avoid contact with bats, forest antelopes, nonhuman primates (such as monkeys and chimpanzees) and wild meat and blood especially in endemic areas.
Lastly, funeral or burial practices that involve touching the body of someone who may have died from Ebola should be avoided.
Experience in West Africa shows these burial practices to be among the super spreaders of the Ebola virus.
Ebola virus disease is a deadly disease that is preventable and curable.
The next step is the local production of diagnostics, vaccines and drugs to ensure that endemic countries control their own stock and can make them available to their population.
Africa can’t be left behind once more when it comes to diagnostics, vaccines and treatment, as it has been during the COVID pandemic and monkeypox outbreaks.
Bowel cancer: Dr Philippa Kaye lists the symptoms
The greatest weapon in the fight against cancer is early detection.
This makes knowing the symptoms front and centre.
Bowel cancer signs often revolve around your stool but one red flag is felt rather than spotted.
An expert shares how to identify this “distressing” sensation “early”.
You might think that whatever happens when you go for a number two should stay in the toilet behind closed doors.
However, paying attention to your bowel habits and all that comes with them could break the news of serious health problems, including bowel cancer.
Mr Anthony Antoniou, a Consultant Colorectal Surgeon at The Princess Grace Hospital and London Digestive Centre, said: “Amongst other symptoms, tenesmus is an early warning sign of bowel cancer which is often ignored.
“Bowel cancer is often referred to as a hidden disease since the symptoms are often very subtle.
READ MORE:
Man, 24, hit with cancer diagnosis after his friend spotted a warning sign in his eyes
Bowel cancer: Symptoms include tenesmus or feeling you need to poo when you don’t.
Trending
SUBSCRIBE Invalid email We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you.
This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding.
You can unsubscribe at any time.
Read our Privacy Policy
Persistent lower abdominal pain could be a symptom of bowel cancer.
READ MORE Man, 24, hit with cancer after his friend spotted sign in his eyes “In patients with recurrent rectal cancer, the reported prevalence of tenesmus is around 14 percent.
“Despite low prevalence, tenesmus is acknowledged clinically as a very distressing symptom that affects the quality of life.”
However, once you experience this toilet sensation, you should speak to your GP.
Mr Antoniou said: “Tenesmus, when present, is continuous which triggers patients to seek medical advice.
Cancer signs and symptoms to look out for include bleeding.
The Office for National Statistics has revealed the new list of long Covid symptoms many Brits have reported, including weakness or tiredness, memory loss or confusion, and even diarrhoea
The new list of long Covid symptoms has been revealed - including all of the 23 most reported signs such as palpitations and vertigo.
The UK government has revealed the most prevalent ongoing symptoms following the Covid-19 infection, with many Brits reporting that these have had very long-lasting effects on their health.
New data, which was revealed today, shows which symptoms Brits have suffered the most from, lasting "any duration" - so longer than 12 weeks.
The Office for National Statistics (ONS) estimated the prevalence of self-reported long Covid and associated activity limitation, using UK Coronavirus Infection Survey data for the four-week period ending February 2.
Image: Getty Images/iStockphoto) Getty Images/iStockphoto)
Long Covid has been defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as the continuation or development of symptoms three months after the initial infection from SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19.
However, it should be noted that long Covid is a complex and dynamic condition – some symptoms disappear, then return, and new symptoms appear.
Among the 23 symptoms that Brits suffer the longest from, the ONS has revealed, are memory loss or confusion, headaches and diarrhoea.
And the most common long Covid symptom has been revealed as weakness or tiredness.
Chest pain or chest discomfort is also a common symptom of long Covid, although it ranks quite low.
This type of pain can feel like the muscles in your chest are sore.
It can hurt when you touch it and the pain gets worse from movements such as turning around or stretching.
Image: Getty Images) Getty Images)
The 23 most reported signs of long Covid, in order:
Weakness or tiredness Difficulty concentrating Shortness of breath Muscle ache Worry or anxiety Low mood or not enjoying Memory loss or confusion Trouble sleeping Headache Cough Runny nose or sneezing Noisy breathing (wheezing) Loss of smell Vertigo or dizziness Palpitations Loss of taste Loss of appetite Sore throat Chest pain Abdominal pain Diarrhoea Nausea or vomiting Fever
While these findings may help researchers better understand how SARS-CoV-2 may mutate, ONS has advised that: "These results should be interpreted with caution because it is not known how many people would have experienced these symptoms even if they had not been infected with coronavirus.
"
The ONS has been contacted by The Mirror for a comment on the new data.
Treatment with nebulized ensifentrine resulted in significant improvements in lung function and reduced the rate and risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations, according to topline results from a phase 3 trial.
Ensifentrine is a first-in-class, dual phosphodiesterase (PDE) 3 and 4 inhibitor with combined bronchodilator and anti-inflammatory actions.
The ENHANCE-1 trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04535986) evaluated the efficacy and safety of nebulized ensifentrine as monotherapy or as an add-on to a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) or a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) in patients with moderate to severe COPD.
Patients were randomly assigned to receive either nebulized ensifentrine 3mg or placebo twice a day for 24 or 48 weeks.
The primary endpoint was the change from baseline of average forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV 1 ) area under the curve (AUC) 0 to 12 hours post dose at week 12.
Secondary endpoints included peak and morning trough FEV 1 , COPD symptoms and health-related quality of life (St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire
[SGRQ]) at 24 weeks.
Results showed that treatment with ensifentrine met the primary endpoint demonstrating a statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement in lung function (placebo-corrected change from baseline in FEV 1 AUC 0-12 post dose of 87mL; P <.0001).
Improvements in secondary endpoints were also observed with an increase in peak FEV 1 of 147mL at 0 to 4 hours post dose (P <.0001) and an increase in morning trough FEV 1 of 35mL (P =.0421) at week 12.
Compared with placebo, patients treated with ensifentrine were found to have statistically significant improvements in daily symptoms as measured by the Evaluating-Respiratory Symptoms (E-RS) total score at week 24.
Statistically significant improvements in quality of life (as measured by SGRQ total score) were also observed in the ensifentrine arm compared with placebo.
Related Content
Additionally, treatment with ensifentrine was associated with a 36% reduction in the rate of moderate to severe COPD exacerbations (P =.0505) and significantly reduced the risk of a moderate to severe exacerbation (as measured by time to first exacerbation) by 38% (P =.0378), when compared with placebo.
Commenting on the findings, Antonio Anzueto, MD, Professor of Medicine and Section, Chief of Pulmonary at South Texas Veterans Healthcare System, said: “These exciting results demonstrate ensifentrine’s potential to become a first-in-class bronchodilator and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory therapy for COPD.
Combined with the significant improvements in lung function, symptom and quality of life measures, as well as the favorable safety profile, these data confirm ensifentrine’s potential to change the treatment paradigm for COPD patients.”
Verona Pharma previously announced positive topline results for nebulized ensifentrine in the ENHANCE-2 trial.
Additional information from both ENHANCE-1 and ENHANCE-2 will be released at upcoming scientific conferences.
The Company plans to submit a New Drug Application to the Food and Drug Administration in the first half of 2023.
Reference
Verona Pharma announces ensifentrine meets primary and key secondary endpoints in phase 3 ENHANCE-1 trial for COPD.
News release.
Verona Pharma.
Accessed December 20, 2022.
https://www.veronapharma.com/media/verona-pharma-announces-ensifentrine-meets-primary-and-key.
In each variant the symptoms of the infection and the subsequent degree of infection varies.
However there are certain common symptoms of the COVID disease which have been found across all the infections caused by different variants.
As per the data released by national health agencies, the common symptoms of COVID are fever or chills, cough, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, fatigue, muscle or body aches, headache, new loss of taste or smell, sore throat, congestion or runny nose, nausea or vomiting and diarrhea.
The symptoms that a human body shows after being exposed to the virus depends on the way the body's immunity reacts to the pathogen.
The classic symptoms of COVID infection include fever, cough, fatigue, and loss of sense of smell and taste.
Severe symptoms linked to the disease are shortness of breath, chest pain, low blood oxygen levels in the body and difficulty in breathing.
Most of the COVID symptoms overlap with the symptoms of common cold and flu and this has been seen in the infection caused by all variants of the virus.
Although Asperger’s and schizophrenia are different conditions, their symptoms may overlap.
Asperger’s and schizophrenia symptoms can include difficulties with social interactions, communication, and language.
This overlap in symptoms can create challenges in diagnosing each condition correctly.
It is also possible for people to have both conditions.
This article looks at the similarities between Asperger’s and schizophrenia, the diagnostic criteria of each condition, and their treatment.
How do doctors diagnose schizophrenia?
To diagnose schizophrenia, a mental health care professional will assess symptoms and conduct tests to rule out other possible conditions.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5) states the following criteria for a schizophrenia diagnosis: Two or more of the following, of which at least one of the first three listed must be present, occurring significantly for 1 month: delusions hallucinations incoherence or disorganized speech unresponsive or significantly disorganized behavior decreased speech, lack of emotional expression, or lack of motivation.
Significant decrease in how a person functions in one or more major areas of their life, such as work, relationships, or self-care.
Symptoms of schizophrenia persist for at least 6 months.
A mental health care professional has ruled out other medical conditions, including schizoaffective disorder, depressive disorder, or bipolar disorder.
Symptoms are not due to medication or drug use.
If people have a history of ASD or a childhood communication disorder, they must fulfill the above criteria and have experienced delusions or hallucinations for at least 1 month to receive a schizophrenia diagnosis.
Learn about the different types of schizophrenia here.
How do doctors diagnose Asperger’s?
To diagnose Asperger’s in children , a mental health care professional will assess symptoms and monitor their development and behavior.
In adults, a mental health care professional may ask questions about behavior patterns and administer tests to assess cognition, language, social communication skills, and restricted and repetitive behaviors and interests.
The DSM-5 now classifies Asperger’s under the umbrella term of ASD.
The DSM-5 lists the following criteria for ASD: persistent lack of social communication and interaction, such as being unresponsive in conversations, abnormal eye contact or body language, lack of facial expressions, or lack of interest in peers
restricted or repeated patterns of behavior, such as insisting on keeping to the same routine, rigid thinking patterns, intense attachment to unusual objects, or abnormal response to stimuli such as lights or sound For an ASD diagnosis, a person must display the following: a persistent deficit in each of three areas of social communication and interaction
at least two out of four types of restricted or repetitive behaviors According to the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) , children with Asperger’s still show early language skills.
Learn about the levels of autism here.
Shared symptoms of Asperger’s and schizophrenia Symptoms of Asperger’s and schizophrenia can overlap and may share the following symptoms:
Hallucinations and delusions People with schizophrenia may have psychosis symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions.
Many people with schizophrenia hear voices.
People may also have sensory experiences of things that are not real.
People with schizophrenia may also have delusions, such as irrational beliefs that are not true.
Up to 34.8% of people with ASD may have psychotic symptoms.
Difficulty processing information, such as in ASD, may increase the risk of developing psychosis symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions.
People with ASD may have unusual sensory experiences.
Delusional beliefs may stem from a lack of understanding of expected social conventions.
Sometimes, doctors and other healthcare professionals have difficult y detecting hallucinations or delusions in children with communication problems.
Affect When a person with schizophrenia displays negative symptoms, they lack certain feelings or motivations that people without the condition would likely have.
People with schizophrenia may have a flat affect, meaning they may respond without facial expression or in a monotone voice.
People with ASD may exhibit similar characteristics, such as reduced eye contact, lack of facial expression, and limited use of gestures.
Social relationships People with ASD or schizophrenia may have difficulty creating or maintaining social relationships.
Social withdrawal may be a symptom of both conditions.
Some people may have difficulty identifying humor, irony, or metaphors in conversation and may not be able to understand the emotional aspects of a social situation.
Theory of mind Theory of mind allows people to recognize mental states, such as emotions, desires, and beliefs, within themselves and others.
People with ASD or schizophrenia may have deficits in theory of mind.
People may find it difficult to identify other people’s emotions or intentions and lack self-awareness.
Social communication Language difficulties may be present in both ASD and schizophrenia.
People with these conditions may not initiate conversations and speak vaguely and repetitively.
Learn more about autism with schizophrenia here.
Outlook Sometimes, mental health care professionals may find it easier to differentiate between extreme cases of ASD and schizophrenia than mild cases of each condition.
People may need to work with a team of healthcare professionals to ensure they receive the correct diagnosis and begin effective treatment.
Treatments for schizophrenia may help people manage their symptoms and improve how they function in education, work, and relationships.
Early diagnosis and treatment of Asperger’s may increase a child’s chance of success in school and independence in adulthood.
With monsoons around the corner, parents are often worried that their child will get a fever after getting wet in the rain.
The first showers are always welcoming after the hot and humid summer, in fact, it’s like a breath of fresh air, however, along with these monsoon showers, there are a host of infections which become very active and leads to a lot of complications.
The common causes of fever during monsoon include viral fever and malaria.
Dengue typhoid, respiratory infections.
Monsoons lead to a large number of areas getting flooded leading to breeding grounds for mosquitoes and other infections like malaria, dengue, leptospirosis caused by rats, and chikungunya.
All these infections cause fever with different degrees of complications.
Viral fever is very common and this fever is typically presented with high-grade, fever, headache, body aches, and watering of the eyes.
If the fever does not subside within a period of 3 to 4 days then the person must get investigated to find out the root cause of the fever.
Viral fevers may be caused by different viruses, including Covid and swine flu, H1, avian flu, bird flu, etc.
Fever is also caused by measles, mumps, rubella, and chicken pox.
All of them would come under the category of viral fever and may present with high-grade fever causing dehydration with or without rash.
And most of these fevers are self-limiting within a period of 5 to 6 days at the most.
If these do not subside, then there’s also a chance that there is a secondary bacterial infection.
Respiratory infections cause fever which can be both viral or bacterial.
This fever presents with cough, cold, high-grade fever may be associated with vomiting.
Fever may subside within 4-5 days unless it progresses to pneumonia, where the course of action may be longer.
Fever may be caused by abdominal infections, like typhoid, or gastroenteritis due to infected food and water.
Complications of fever are severe and need to be monitored.
Gastroenteritis may cause severe dehydration and convulsions (fits) due to body electrolyte imbalance.
Fever is caused by different parasites like malaria parasite, dengue and chikungunya.
The common characteristic of these fevers are high-grade fever associated with or without chills, severe headache, joint pains in chikungunya and internal bleeding in dengue.
If the fever is rapidly progressing it needs to be treated immediately.
Excessive overdose of drugs or drug allergy may also cause fever.
High-grade fever may lead to convulsions or fits in children less than 5 years of age causing febrile convulsions.
Maintaining nutrition and adequate fluids is important.
Investigations should be carried out if fever persists for over 4-5 days, not responding to paracetamol and over-the-counter drugs.
Taking the right treatment is the correct way for different types of fevers forms the cornerstone of treatment and prevents complications.
Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
BERKELEY -- False-negative rapid COVID tests are on the rise.
When Carl Berger got sick earlier this year, he figured he had COVID-19 because his wife had the virus.
"I think I had a headache and I generally felt kind of weak.
I had contact with my wife, who is known to be positive -
So I figured there was a good likelihood that I was positive," said Berger.
He took a rapid test at home.
It came back negative.
"I was skeptical," said the East Bay man.
A few days after that, both a rapid test and PCR came up positive for COVID-19.
A study published by the Harvard School of Public Health in April noted that some strains were harder to locate using a rapid test than others.
ALSO READ: How COVID-19 symptoms are changing: sore throat, hoarse voice now top symptoms with newer variant
"The delta variant was more difficult to detect, it had a higher limit of detection than omicron.
This may relate to the omicron subvariants because some of the strains of the omicron subvariant do have mutations in the gene that's detected by the antigen test," said Ph.D. candidate Sydney Stanley.
Dr. James Kirby of the Harvard School of Public Health says just like vaccines are getting new strain updates, so should tests.
"If we look at the original antigen tests that are out there, they just have data for the original Washington strain," said Kirby
It's a sentiment echoed by Dr. John Swartzberg of UC Berkeley.
"Another thing we learned from that study is that we have to constantly be re-looking at the rapid tests to make sure as this virus spins off new variants and subvariants is that the rapid tests work as well against the new ones as they did against the old ones," said Swartzberg.
ALSO READ: Study of long-term effects of COVID reinfections reveals lasting health problems
He says don't be surprised if your first rapid test comes up negative when you have symptoms.
"Often, early in the course of illness, the rapid test is negative when you actually have that disease," Swartzberg said.
There are other theories on why false negatives are on the rise, including that the viral load hasn't reached contagious levels and that vaccines are doing what they are supposed to do: keeping viral loads low.
Health experts advise people who have symptoms to isolate until they get at least three negative rapid tests over the course of several days.
ALSO READ:
Latest Bay Area COVID-19 surge comes as fewer report test results
This Morning: Doctor discusses possible cause of UTI symptoms
This Morning: Doctor discusses possible cause of UTI symptoms
Doctors have been given new guidelines for diagnosing UTIs in a bid to reduce the number of antibiotics given out and prevent resistance to the drugs
New symptoms you must have before GP can say you have UTI and prescribe antibiotics
Doctors should not be diagnosing Urinary tract infections (UTIs) in under-65s without at least two symptoms present, health experts have now said.
UTIs - a common condition in women and people with female reproductive organs - should only be diagnosed if you have more than one "key symptom", doctors are now saying.
This includes a burning pain when passing urine, needing to wee more at night and “cloudy” urine.
The new advice has been given out to stop antibiotics being given out unnecessarily and reduce antibiotic resistance.
Experts at the National Institute for Care and Excellence (Nice) say the more stringent measures for diagnosing UTIs will help "support appropriate management”.
Image: Getty Images/iStockphoto) Getty Images/iStockphoto)
The organisation has also tweaked the amount of time recommended to take a course of antibiotics for bladder infections like cystitis, with women to only take a three-day course.
Men and pregnant patients meanwhile should be prescribed a seven-day course of treatment, Nice said.
It said short courses of treatment for women can reduce their risk to antibiotic resistance and are “sufficient” for treating most UTIs.
Men have a higher risk of complications from UTIs than women – which mean they need a longer course of treatment, Nice added.
And pregnant women are at “greater risk of harm from a UTI than non-pregnant women”.
Image: Shared Content Unit) Shared Content Unit)
Women have a shorter urethra than men, this means that bacteria are more likely to reach the bladder or kidneys and cause an infection.
Because of this, no specific recommendations have been made for trans people and GPs are urged to consider treatment courses on a case-by case basis – including information on any gender reassignment surgery and structural changes to a person’s urethra.
Meanwhile, men and women who are not pregnant do not need antibiotic treatment if a UTI is picked up but they have no symptoms.
“Unnecessary antibiotic treatment of asymptomatic bacteria is associated with increased risk of adverse events and is of no clinical benefit,” the Nice quality standard states.
Meanwhile Nice said that certain patients with recurrent UTIs should be referred for specialist advice
Dr Paul Chrisp, director of Centre for Guidelines at Nice, said: “UTIs are a common occurrence, but they can cause people a great amount of discomfort and pain.
For people with recurrent UTIs this can lead to a reduction in their quality of life.
“This quality standard sets out useful and usable guidance for health professionals to improve the diagnosis and management of UTIs in both women and men while also setting a clear treatment pathway for people with a recurrent UTI who are at higher risk of complications.
“The standard will also help ensure that people are not misdiagnosed.
“By setting out clear methods for the diagnosis of UTIs, it will help limit the prescription of unnecessary antibiotics which may increase anti-microbial resistance to certain treatments.”
Previous guidance from Public Health England in 2020 suggests that women under 65 who present with two or more symptoms of a UTI do not need to use a dipstick test to confirm their infection.
CROMWELL, Conn., April 14, 2021 /PRNewswire/ -- This IBS Awareness Month, Culturelle® Probiotics is giving the 35 million Americans that suffer from IBS1 the time back that they lost due to IBS symptoms with the launch of Culturelle® IBS Complete Support, a medical food for the dietary management of IBS that can reduce severity of IBS symptoms by 60%.†
And to help them celebrate their reclaimed time Culturelle® Probiotics launched the Take Back Your Days campaign, offering monetary rewards to use toward their more symptom-free days.
On average, those that suffer from IBS miss out on 20 percent of the year2.
The Take Back Your Days program is an answer to those impacted days, offering consumers a chance to win $100 to spend doing something they enjoy with time they have reclaimed from IBS symptoms.
Consumers can enter during the month of April, and the first 1,000 entrants will receive a free box of Culturelle® IBS Complete Support, to be used only under medical supervision and direction.
Culturelle® IBS Complete Support is the first product from the brand that does not contain probiotics.
It is a medical food powered by HMO bioactive prebiotics, natural digestive nutrients, that promote the growth of your own good gut bacteria.
When taken daily under the supervision of a physician, it is clinically shown to relieve IBS symptoms such as stomach pain, bloating, constipation and diarrhea associated with all types of IBS.† As with all Culturelle® products, it is clinically studied and passes the highest standards of testing.
"We are digestive health experts, so developing a product that helps with the severity of IBS symptoms was natural," said Brand Manager Eric Bianco.
"Providing an opportunity for these customers to not only have more symptom-free days but enjoy those days on us is part of who we are.
We develop products and solutions to help our customers live every day with confidence.
"
Culturelle® IBS Complete Support reduces days with symptoms due to IBS by 50 percent†, giving sufferers more freedom.
Culturelle® IBS Complete Support is free from yeast, gluten, added sugar, soy and artificial dyes.
It is available now at a number of retailers, with a suggested retail price starting at $29.98.
About Culturelle® Probiotics
Culturelle® is a leading probiotic brand focused on supporting the digestive and immune health of families worldwide^. Its portfolio of products covers the needs of families from infants to adults.
Using only ingredients that pass the highest standards of testing, Culturelle® products contain probiotic strains that have been thoroughly researched, such as Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, which has over 30 years of scientific research and over 200 clinical studies.
†Shown in an open label clinical study including 317 IBS participants.
^Based on: Nielsen xAOC 52 W/E 1/23/21.
Culturelle® is distributed by i-Health, Inc.
Culturelle® is a trademark of DSM.
© i-Health, Inc. 2021.
All rights reserved.
SOURCE Culturelle
Why is this study important?
What did it find?
Hypertension in young adults: What causes it & what are the red flags?
Obesity is a serious health concern worldwide.
Health agencies and experts have been urging people to follow a healthy lifestyle in order to keep their weight under control.
People are being encouraged to engage in physical activity and eat healthy food.
As per the World Health Organisation (WHO), more than 650 million people are obese.
"Most of the world's population live in countries where overweight and obesity kills more people than underweight," it says.
According to a new study, obesity may increase a woman's menopause symptoms and decrease the amount of relief she receives from hormone treatment.
The findings of the study will be revealed during The Menopause Society's 2023 Annual Meeting in Philadelphia.
Hormone treatment remains the most effective treatment to manage a wide array of menopause symptoms.
Little research has been done, however, on the impact of comorbidities on the efficacy of hormone treatment during menopause.
More specifically, no research is known to exist relative to the effect of obesity on the effectiveness of hormone treatment.
A new five-year study involving 119 patients sought to fill some of that information void by investigating the association between obesity and self-reported efficacy of hormone treatment in peri- and postmenopausal women.
In this study, obesity was defined as a body mass index of greater than or equal to 30.There were no statistically significant differences between the two groups of patients (obese vs. non-obese) relative to age, duration of menopause, or use/acceptance of hormone treatment.
Women with obesity, however, were more likely to self-identify as Black, report the presence of hot flashes, genitourinary/vulvovaginal symptoms, mood disturbances, and decreased libido.
Based on the results, the researchers concluded that menopausal women with obesity experienced an increase in menopause symptom prevalence and lower efficacy of hormone treatment.
Dr. Anita Pershad from Eastern Virginia Medical School in Norfolk led the study which will be presented at the 2023 Annual Meeting of The Menopause Society.
“We studied menopausal symptoms in an underrepresented patient population that’s not often included in women’s health studies.
This research can help clinicians serving a more diverse racial and socioeconomic patient population that’s severely affected by the social determinants of health to provide better tailored care and counseling to patients seeking treatment for their menopausal symptoms,” says Dr. Pershad.
“This is important for healthcare professionals to consider when counseling their patients on the various options for managing their menopause symptoms,” adds Dr. Stephanie Faubion, medical director for The Menopause Society.
“Considering that more than 40% of women over the age of 40 are classified as obese according to the CDC, these results could be meaningful to a large percentage of patients transitioning through menopause.”
Mar 15, 2023, 10:06PM IST
Source: TIMESOFINDIA.COM
H3N2 influenza virus has claimed 7 lives across the country.
This subtype of influenza A virus can cause mild to severe impact on human health which makes it important to know the symptoms so that timely medical help is taken.
Watch this video to know more the signs and symptoms associated with H3N2 influenza virus.
Eileen Adamson took pride in reaching 50 without suffering a single tooth cavity.
She put it down to her strict oral health regime, including twice-weekly flossing and dental check-ups at least every three months.
Then, two months ago, her dentist spotted signs of gum disease – for the first time in her life.
‘My gums were inflamed and there were signs they were starting to recede,’ says the teacher, from Dumfries.
‘I also noticed my mouth became unbearably dry.
I was waking up several times in the night gasping for a drink, which left me exhausted.
When I drank a bit too much coffee, I’d get this strange metallic, bitter flavour.’
Eileen’s dentist suggested she try a different toothpaste made without certain compounds that can irritate the mouth.
But a month and a half on, there was no relief – so she arranged an appointment with a nutritionist who specialises in the menopause.
‘I went to see her for advice on what to eat to maintain my muscle mass post-menopause,’ says Eileen, who had her last period two years ago.
‘When I mentioned the problems with my mouth, she immediately said it was probably menopause-related.
I was shocked.
Studies show up to half of the 13 million menopausal women in the UK suffer oral-health symptoms such as painful gums, dry mouth, tooth loss and even phantom tastes
‘It all started to make sense, given I had also been suffering hot flushes for a year, and blood tests taken a few months prior confirmed my hormones were of menopausal levels.
But I thought, “Why did no one tell me this might happen?”’
Studies show up to half of the 13 million menopausal women in the UK suffer oral-health symptoms such as painful gums, dry mouth, tooth loss and even phantom tastes – and that these are as common as hot flushes and memory lapses.
But experts say too few healthcare professionals are aware of the link, leaving patients batted back and forth between dentists and GPs, and failing to get treatment that could help.
The Mail on Sunday approached ten GPs to ask if they would consider the menopause as a potential cause of one of the above problems.
Only half said yes, and were aware of available treatments.
Dr Uchenna Okoye, clinical director of London Smiling and former dental clinician at St George’s Hospital in London, sees this scenario ‘most days’ in her clinic.
She says: ‘Doctors and other dentists don’t even consider the menopause could have anything to do with it.
‘Last week I saw a patient who’d been told by her dentist she’d have to wear dentures at the age of 53.
She had terrible gum disease and her teeth were moving about, but she was made to feel ashamed, as if she’d failed to look after her teeth properly.
When I mentioned the menopause, it was like a lightbulb moment.’
Dr Okoye recommends that patients request hormone replacement therapy (HRT) from their GP, to replenish the sex hormones like oestrogen and progesterone that diminish after the menopause.
TEETH FACT
A recent poll of 5,000 people indicated that 75 per cent of British women visited a dentist in the past year, compared to 60 per cent of men.
Advertisement
A 2017 study found women taking supplementary hormones were 44 per cent less likely to suffer severe gum disease, the precursor to many common complaints.
‘In some cases, patients may need to be on a higher dose of oestrogen, or take it in a different form, like switching from the patch to a pill,’ says Dr Okoye.
Eileen had been taking the treatment for more than a year when the mouth symptoms began, but is planning to ask her doctor to reconsider her dosage.
When the monthly reproductive cycle gradually stops, the dramatic slump in oestrogen plays particular havoc with both the soft tissues and bones in the mouth.
‘The mouth is abundant in oestrogen-receptor cells, which rely on the hormone to function properly,’ explains Dr Philippa Kaye, GP and author of The M Word: Everything You Need To Know About The Menopause.
‘Most of these cells sit in the mucus-producing membrane that coasts the mouth and the glands that produce saliva.’
These elements keep the area sterile and moist.
Without the hormone, the membrane produces less mucus, causing severe dryness and allowing bacteria to build up rapidly.
A 2003 Swedish study found that menopausal women with low oestrogen levels had significantly less saliva circulating in the mouth and more bacteria, compared to another group of similarly aged women taking supplementary oestrogen for one year.
The oral-health symptoms suffered by menopausal women are as common as hot flushes and memory lapses, studies show (file photo)
‘Without oestrogen, bacteria soon starts to attack the teeth and gums, causing severe gum disease leading to bad breath, bleeding gums and terrible pain,’ says Dr Okoye ‘If left untreated, the gums start to recede, making teeth loose and increasing the risk they fall out.
‘A lot of women feel as if they wake up one day and their teeth are suddenly crooked,’ she adds.
Oestrogen is essential for making collagen, which keeps the elastic gum tissue taut and helps to maintain teeth in place.
And what of the metallic tastes experienced by many menopausal women?
Scientists aren’t quite sure why this happens, but some believe it is related to malfunctioning oestrogen-receptor cells in and around the tongue.
For roughly a third of menopausal women this, combined with a severely dry mouth, results in an extreme sensation known as Burning Mouth Syndrome, a scalding or tingling feeling that can affect the lips and tongue and tends to come and go.
But there’s confusion over who is best placed to treat the problems.
According to guidance set by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), doctors should refer patients to a dentist for oral-health problems, except for a growth, muscular problems in the jaw and suspected oral herpes.
But Dr Okoye says: ‘A lot of dentists don’t know to ask about the menopause, so they treat the gum disease but don’t address the root of the problem.
A 2017 study found women taking supplementary hormones were 44 per cent less likely to suffer severe gum disease, the precursor to many common complaints (file photo)
‘Or they might just offer an artificial saliva spray for dry mouth.
But when the problem doesn’t go away, or gets worse, patients can’t understand why.’
GPs are ‘stuck between a rock and a hard place’ when it comes to treatment, says Dr Kaye.
‘The guidance does mention anything about prescribing HRT for someone who has oral symptoms.
If someone comes to us with funny tastes in their mouth and gum disease, we have to send them to their dentist for treatment in the first instance.’
And this presents challenges for dentists.
Dr Okoye says: ‘Our training features virtually nothing about the menopause, apart from a sentence at the bottom of a long list of potential causes of dry mouth.
Ideally, all dentists should be thinking about it as soon as they see a woman of a certain age.’
For most of Dr Okoye’s patients, HRT eases symptoms.
But for some, including those with Burning Mouth Syndrome, it is less effective.
‘There are other things that can help, such as avoiding toothpastes with a detergent called SLS that further dries out the mouth,’ she says.
‘And avoiding acidic, spicy foods and alcohol can reduce strange metallic tastes.’
Prevention is also crucial.
Dr Okoye says she tells all pre-menopausal women: ‘to over-compensate for what mother nature is about to do’.
That means a full clean with the hygienist every three months, as opposed to every six.
And flossing twice a day, every day, with close monitoring from a dentist.
She says: ‘I want to arm as many women as possible with this information, so they know the right questions to ask – even if a dentist or doctor doesn’t.’
Just because we’re in a pandemic doesn’t mean that flu season is canceled.
In fact, rising influenza cases are expected to correlate with spikes of coronavirus infections as the weather cools down.
But it’s important not to wait until you start sneezing to take precautions to keep from spreading the flu to others—it’s possible, and even likely, that you can pass the flu to other people before ever showing symptoms.
To understand how the flu is transmitted before symptoms set in, it’s important to know the difference between pre-symptomatic and asymptomatic transmission.
In pre-symptomatic influenza cases, a person has been infected with the flu but has yet to develop symptoms.
In general, it takes about two to three days after infection for symptoms to set in, according to Seema Lakdawala, an assistant professor at the University of Pittsburgh who researches influenza viruses.
During that time, the infected person is shedding virus particles whenever they exhale, and other people can catch the flu from those particles.
“When somebody gets infected, it takes a while for them to develop symptoms associated with the viral infection,” says Lakdwala.
“Before they have a fever or a cough or feel lethargic, the virus has already affected them and they are already shedding large amounts of virus.”
In contrast, an asymptomatic person will never develop symptoms.
However, they will still develop antibodies which will help their immune system to deter future infections.
Researchers are not entirely sure whether asymptomatic flu cases can transmit the virus.
“You can argue there is some evidence that you can’t,” says Lakdawala, but studies have been mixed.
Asymptomatic individuals do shed viral particles, it’s just not clear how often they’d shed enough to infect another person.
And it’s further complicated by the fact that mild symptoms, like sneezing, might not make you feel particularly sick even though you do, in fact, have the flu.
About one in three cases of the flu are asymptomatic, but it’s important to remember that the same strain that didn’t make you all that sick could be serious for anyone elderly or with a compromised immune system.
So yes, you can pass on the flu before you develop symptoms—but if you never develop symptoms, evidence suggests it’s unlikely you were ever contagious, even if you have antibodies.
(It’s worth noting that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention currently reports that the novel coronavirus behaves in a similar way, though people with COVID-19 can be pre-symptomatic for far longer than people with the flu.)
People do have a natural immune response specific to one strain of the flu, and recent research indicates that your first flu infection, which usually occurs before the age of five, determines the strain you are most equipped to fight off.
But the influenza virus mutates rapidly, so the vaccine has to change every year to try to give the population a reasonable level of immunity.
People may respond differently to the flu vaccine depending on which strain of flu they have antibodies for, but no matter what, getting your flu shot each year lowers your chances of catching flu and passing it on to other people.
That’s why the best way to help yourself and society at large is to get your annual flu vaccine.
“Immunity is a huge barrier for transmission,” says Lakdawala.
“The way that viruses will stop transmitting in our population is when there is immunity, either through natural infection or through vaccination.”
Even though the flu vaccine doesn’t give 100 percent protection, lowering the risk does give us some degree of protection as a community.
On top of getting the flu shot, there are other methods of preventing the spread of influenza, and they’re the same methods the world has been using to deter the spread of the coronavirus: social distancing, wearing masks, and washing hands regularly.
Though flu season is just beginning in the US, COVID-19 precautions have already been linked to a drastic decrease in influenza cases in Australia, where peak flu season is during the US summer months.
“By staying home when you are sick, wearing a mask when you are sick, keeping a distance from people and not trying to power through when you don’t feel good by going to school or going to work, we have seen the burden of influenza infections go down dramatically,” says Lakdawala.
“That, to me, is really representative of what we can do if we are really serious about limiting influenza burden.”
Although the exact connection between diabetes and RLS is not fully understood, some studies suggest a link.
Patients with RLS experience uncomfortable sensations in their legs, often relieved by movement.
It is essential for individuals with diabetes to monitor their blood sugar levels regularly, follow a healthy diet, engage in regular physical activity, and take prescribed medications or insulin as directed by their healthcare provider.
Routine foot care and regular check-ups with a healthcare professional are vital to identify any potential complications early.
Once again, the Student Assembly (SA) has landed itself, and the university at large, on the front pages of national news–as an embarrassment to the university.
The SA’s unanimously approved Resolution 31, imploring the university to mandate trigger warnings in classrooms, was the subject of a stern letter from the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression (FIRE).
President Pollack’s strong rejection yesterday was featured in the Wall Street Journal, Fox News, The Hill, The Daily Caller, and Newsmax.
In fact, this is not the first time the student body has considered trigger warnings.
In 2015 the Sun examined the evolution of the practice organically.
Before now, nobody has attempted to implement trigger warnings by fiat.
The fiat in question comes from Cornell’s Student Assembly, an elected body of student representatives that makes suggestions to the administration for university policy.
Frankly, Resolution 31 is an embarrassment, particularly for students.
In fact, this debacle is only an embarrassment for Cornell insofar as how poorly it reflects on the caliber of Cornell students.
Cornell students, if the Student Assembly is to be believed, would give up their freedoms—to learn, listen, speak and engage—to avert even the slightest discomfort.
Hiding from ideas is no less than intellectual cowardice.
It’s exactly the opposite of what this country needs.
We’re at a critical juncture where no one feels they can talk to each other, and the SA’s solution is to hamstring any potentially uncomfortable discussion that is occurring in classrooms.
Those who would give up essential Liberty, to purchase a little temporary Safety, deserve neither Liberty nor Safety.
Benjamin Franklin
The sheer idiocy of such a proposition is astounding.
It allows our elders to present our generation of students as one that knows nothing of the American tradition of open inquiry and free discourse.
As a generation that’s too soft for freedom, a generation that cannot sustain the rights they have.
Maybe they’re right: every member of the assembly voted for the resolution, and the vast majority of the student body lifted nary a finger in protest.
While we at the Review applaud President Pollack for taking a strong stand on this issue, we are even more concerned that her ideas are not self-evident.
In the halcyon days of the university’s past, presidents had no need to explain the importance of academic freedom and open discourse to Ivy League students.
Make no mistake: this is a major free speech issue.
The SA’s measure would have placed sanctionable limitations on what is and is not acceptable to utter in the classroom.
That many in the Student Assembly believe curtailing others’ rights is wise, let alone desirable, is evidence enough of the institution’s worthlessness.
Something is deeply wrong at Cornell if those who should be most devoted to the idea of open discourse and free expression—those in student government—are seeking to constrain it.
There’s something disconcerting about students, especially at Cornell, asking to not be taught.
When the SA requests not only warnings, but excuses for content students find disturbing (as SA Res. 31 would have required), we are left to wonder: why go to school at all?
If not to be exposed to different, uncomfortable ideas, what are we all paying for?
The SA asks that we institutionalize the university as a mere credential.
“I attended for four years, I paid tens of thousands of dollars, I got a fancy piece of paper.”
No longer is the academy a place of rigorous thought and intellectual experimentation.
Now it’s a box to be checked en route to a big white-collar paycheck.
Even if the SA is to be taken at its word—that trigger warnings are necessary to assuage the suffering of PTSD victims—the literature is, to say the least, divided.
The therapeutic merit of trigger warnings is a subject of inquiry, but many studies have returned mixed, if not negative, results.
Some researchers, like a psychology expert at Harvard, have found that trigger warnings only reinforce trauma as part of a victim’s identity.
The debate on trigger warnings is a legitimate one– we at the Review are for discourse, after all.
However, the SA did not seek discourse or debate.
They attempted to use the bureaucratic might of the university to force their project on thousands of students and faculty.
Who gave the SA license to do this?
Interest in the Student Assembly has declined year over year, now reaching only 10.55% eligible voter turnout.
Now, a body with anemic interest from the student body has seen fit to open a national conversation not a soul at Cornell requested.
And yet they embarrass the student body—on a national scale—time and time again.
In aggressive displays of naivete, the SA has previously attempted to endorse Boycott, Divest, and Sanction, disarm the Cornell University Police Department, and even censure Cornell’s own former presidents.
In each case, Cornell’s administration was forced to step in and dismiss the SA’s recommendations.
With each letter from President Pollack explaining why the SA’s latest proposal is a terrible idea, the idea of student self governance is further delegitimized.
Administrators chiming in on matters of “student self governance” reveals the system for what it really is: adults correcting the actions of wayward children.
Cornell’s system of shared governance only works with mutual trust.
The students must trust the SA to accurately convey their feelings to the administration.
The administrators must trust the SA to be a liaison between thousands of undergraduates and the bureaucracy.
That trust has completely broken down.
We at the Review are left to ask: where now?
Thankfully, this proposal has been coldly slapped down by the administration, but we still worry.
Of the myriad issues facing our beloved alma mater, the declining interest in open discourse could be an existential threat to not only journalism, but the very idea of liberal education.
If students no longer want to engage with difficult material, for how much longer can the academy endure?
Despite the fact that 1.3 million women enter menopause every year, it’s only recently that the world has started paying attention to menopause symptoms.
It’s long overdue, considering the symptoms of menopause go well beyond the oft-parodied hot flash.
“It has been well established that menopause can affect a woman from head to toe,” says Somi Javaid, MD, a fellow of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and founder and chief medical officer of HerMD.
Menopause impacts your sex life, your mental health, even your wardrobe.
It’s time to make menopause symptoms as top of mind and well-acknowledged as those experienced during puberty.
As significant as these lifestyle changes are to women, talking about menopause is important from more than just a cultural perspective.
“It’s important to talk about the impact that a decline of estrogen has on the body, in general,” says ob-gyn Leah Millheiser, MD, a North American Menopause Society–certified menopause practitioner and the chief medical officer of Evernow menopause treatment center.
“This includes a loss of bone mass, which can lead to osteoporosis and potentially life-threatening bone fractures down the road; cardiovascular disease; type 2 diabetes; weight, skin, and hair changes; cognitive changes; and sexual function changes (think a decreased sex drive, vaginal dryness, and pain during sex).”
Says Dr. Millheiser, “Knowledge is key here.”
As is a good relationship with your doctor, so that together you can decide on the best menopause treatment for you.
So what can you expect?
Here's everything you need to know about menopause symptoms.
But first, what is menopause?
Menopause is defined as the cessation of ovarian function and is officially diagnosed when you’ve gone a full year without a menstrual period.
However, you can be experiencing pre-menopause symptoms, also known as perimenopause, for years before that.
“From puberty to menopause, your period is the result of a follicle, or egg, being released at ovulation and failing to be fertilized,” says Lizellen La Folette, MD, a board-certified ob-gyn and medical advisor for Stripes.
“The cycle is controlled by estrogen and progesterone, our reproductive hormones.
During menopause, the ovaries become more and more resistant to ovulating because there are fewer and fewer follicles to release.”
This drop-off isn’t linear, which is why you may experience years of irregular periods and early menopause symptoms before officially entering menopause.
(For most women, the menopausal transition starts around age 45—the average age of menopause diagnosis is 51.)
The result is that “the brain-ovary connection goes from being a well-oiled machine that produces regular cycles to a state of stress and dysfunction,” Dr. La Folette says.
What are common menopause symptoms?
Big changes are to be expected during this time, and while they may be totally natural, menopause symptoms can feel pretty disorienting.
Much like the symptoms you might experience during your period or pregnancy, the symptoms of menopause are systemic, meaning they’ll cause changes in expected places (like your vagina) and in some not so expected places (like your skin).
Heart attack is one of the leading causes of death worldwide.
An estimated 17.9 million people died from CVDs in 2016, representing 31% of all global deaths, as per the World Health Organization (WHO).
Of these deaths, the global health agency suggests that 85% were due to heart attack and stroke.
One of the primary reasons behind such alarming figures is the disease's ability to strike suddenly and without any prior signs and/or symptoms.
Even if symptoms appear, they are easily mistaken or misunderstood for something as common as an indigestion or heartburn.
That said, here are some warning signs of heart attack to beware of...
Also read: Note!
You may experience Monkeypox symptoms in THIS order
