In summary It’s a confusing time in the COVID pandemic.
A new booster is on the way, but cases are rising and you might want more protection now.
Another COVID-19 wave is hitting California as the summer ends and kids head back to school.
It’s a familiar story by now, but one that has become perhaps more confusing with time because of changing public health recommendations, new vaccine boosters and our evolving understanding of the virus.
There’s no reason to panic, State Epidemiologist Dr. Erica Pan said, with population immunity at high levels.
“Over the course of the last three-and-a-half years, we’re fairly sure everybody’s been exposed or vaccinated at least once, or exposed and infected whether they knew it or not,” Pan said.
“There’s thankfully a lot more immunity overall.”
The test positivity rate has been growing steadily over the past two months, increasing about 8 percentage points since July to a 12.5% seven-day average.
That’s a higher positivity rate than last winter’s surge, although testing data has become less reliable as access decreased and testing rates plummeted.
But wastewater surveillance networks confirm what the testing data suggests: COVID-19 infections are on the rise across California.
The second indicator of COVID-19’s comeback — hospitalizations — is also trending upward.
The number of daily new hospital admissions increased more than 87% since the start of summer.
The Labor Day holiday will surely fuel more transmission and hospitalizations, but hospitals are nowhere near the brink of collapse that previous surges threatened.
The uptick in cases is not having a “dramatic impact on hospitals” so far, California Hospitals Association spokeswoman Jan Emerson-Shea said.
Still, public health experts recommend people take the typical precautions to prevent a serious outbreak: vaccinate, mask and isolate.
“Some people are very terrified.
Most people are not thinking about (COVID-19) at all.
The right answer is somewhere in between,” said Dr. Peter Chin-Hong, an infectious disease specialist at UCSF Health.
“At the minimum we have enough tools to have individual protection without having mandates.”
If you’re wondering what the latest uptick means, you’re not alone.
Here are answers to common questions.
What does it mean to be fully vaccinated?
At this point, vaccination is one of the most confusing aspects of the constantly mutating Sars-CoV-2 virus.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention now advises people age 6 and older who are not immunocompromised to have at least one bivalent Moderna or Pfizer shot to be considered fully vaccinated.
That means if you have never gotten a COVID-19 vaccine before, you only need to get one bivalent shot.
And, if you had previous versions of the vaccine (known as monovalent vaccines), you need to get a bivalent shot to be fully vaccinated.
The bivalent shot was introduced last fall to protect against the highly contagious omicron variant.
People who are older than 65 can also get a second dose of the bivalent vaccine if their last one happened at least four months earlier.
The recommendations for children 5 and younger and for those who are immunocompromised are more complex, but the CDC created flow charts to determine your status, and it’s recommended you speak with your doctor.
Should I wait for the new booster?
“It all depends on who you are.
Given the uptick in cases right now, if you’re vulnerable you may not want to wait,” Chin-Hong of UCSF said.
The Food and Drug Administration is expected to approve a third version of the vaccine that takes into account more recent variants before the end of September.
But, as Chin-Hong said, people who are older than 65 or immunocompromised might not want to wait until that shot is widely available to boost their immunity.
The bivalent shot still protects against severe disease, hospitalization and death.
The CDC is expected to make age-specific recommendations Sept. 12 during a regulatory meeting, but Chin-Hong said waiting for an updated vaccine is “an interesting and nuanced thing.”
If you’re sending your kids off to college and you don’t think they’ll get the updated booster on their own next month, it’s better to take them to get the bivalent booster now, Chin-Hong said.
“Convenience trumps timing,” he said.
Do schools still require COVID vaccinations?
In short, no.
Staying up-to-date on COVID-19 shots and boosters is “strongly recommended” by the University of California and California State University systems, but it’s no longer a requirement to attend class in-person.
Likewise, the vaccine is not required for K-12 students although public health experts advise kids as young as 6 months old be vaccinated.
Children remain the most undercovered group.
A mere 3% of children under 5 are up-to-date on the vaccine while less than 8% of children ages 5 to 11 are fully vaccinated.
A recent study suggests 70% of COVID-19 cases transmitted within U.S. households are started by a school-aged child.
Other studies suggest teachers are at increased risk of infection.
For how long am I supposed to isolate after infection?
The rule of thumb to remember when you test positive is five days of isolation followed by five days of masking, but of course with all things COVID-19 there are caveats, according to the CDC.
You can end isolation after five days if you have no symptoms or they are improving AND if you have not had a fever for 24 hours.
If you have a fever, continue isolating until 24 hours after it ends.
You should wear a mask around others for a total of 10 days from the onset of symptoms.
You may remove the mask before 10 days if you have two negative tests spaced at least a day apart.
If you live with someone who has COVID-19 or are exposed to an otherwise close contact, public health officials recommend wearing a mask for 10 days.
All of this applies to school-aged children although your school might have its own policies.
If one of your kids contracts COVID-19 but their sibling tests negative and are asymptomatic, there’s no reason to keep the asymptomatic kids home from school, although you should monitor them for developing symptoms.
Where can I get treatment?
Antiviral treatment is widely available in California.
Experts recommend anyone 12 and older who tests positive for COVID-19 seek treatment immediately and not wait until symptoms worsen.
Primary care providers can issue a prescription for the treatment Paxlovid or people can call the state COVID-19 hotline for a free telehealth appointment to check eligibility.
The state hotline is 833-686-5051.
It is important to keep in mind that Paxlovid, the oral antiviral approved to treat COVID-19, is only for those ages 12 and older.
Remdesivir is the only FDA-approved treatment for those younger than 12 who are at risk of developing severe disease, but it is administered intravenously, which means it typically requires a hospital stay.
The best way to prevent severe disease among young kids is vaccination.
Are COVID tests, vaccines and treatments still free?
COVID-19 vaccines and treatment are still free in California regardless of insurance or immigration status.
Tests are also still free for most Californians, thanks to a state law passed last year, although you might have to file a reimbursement claim with your insurer after buying a test.
The state’s MyTurn vaccine portal is still open to schedule appointments, and the state COVID-19 hotline runs 24/7 to assess treatment eligibility.
Those services will remain free and widely available at least through February 2024, the Public Health Department’s Pan said.
California will also receive 700,000 vaccine doses from the federal government that will be distributed to county health departments, local pharmacies and community providers to ensure access to free vaccination, Pan said.
In addition state-regulated insurers, who provide most health insurance in California, are required to permanently cover in-network testing, vaccination and treatment free of charge.
Out-of-network coverage will end Nov. 11.
If you have a federally regulated health insurance plan, coverage of testing expired in May.
These health plans are required to permanently cover free COVID-19 vaccines but may not cover the full cost of treatment after November.
You can ask your workplace what kind of coverage you have.
What are my rights at work?
Employers are required to follow workplace safety and health regulations to protect workers from COVID-19, this includes:
Providing personal protective equipment like masks when requested by the employee
Offering free tests during paid time to employees who had a close COVID-positive contact at work and during workplace outbreaks.
Employers can’t prohibit employees from wearing face masks as the In-N-Out burger chain did with its non-California restaurants, and they can’t retaliate against workers who choose to exercise their rights.
Employers can, however, still require employee vaccination and masking.
Extended sick leave for COVID-19 expired in December 2022, but state labor law requires employers give full-time employees three days of paid leave annually.
What about other seasonal infections?
COVID-19 isn’t the only respiratory virus making the rounds.
Last winter a “tripledemic” of influenza, respiratory syncytial virus and COVID-19 gripped the state, prompting local health emergencies.
This year for the first time, those who are at highest risk of respiratory syncytial virus, also known as RSV, have options for protection.
People 60 and older can get an RSV vaccine, and babies and toddlers can get a drug that prevents severe disease.
The 2023 flu vaccine is already available.
“Everyone should get themselves and their loved ones vaccinated before these things start circulating because it takes a couple of weeks or so for that immunity to kick in and provide protection,” Pan said.
Supported by the California Health Care Foundation (CHCF), which works to ensure that people have access to the care they need, when they need it, at a price they can afford.
Visit www.chcf.org to learn more.
Josh Shapiro, the lone Democratic candidate for governor in the Pennsylvania primary, has tested positive for COVID-19.
The state attorney general tweeted that he took a precautionary test last night before heading to Johnstown and Pittsburgh for Election Day, and is experiencing mild symptoms.
He’s currently isolating at home.
Shapiro had planned to cast his ballot in his hometown of Abington this morning, then make remarks in Johnstown before attending an Election Night party for Lt. Governor candidate Austin Davis in Pittsburgh.
Last night, after taking a precautionary test before heading to Johnstown and Pittsburgh, I tested positive for COVID-19.
WHYY thanks our sponsors — become a WHYY sponsor I’m experiencing some mild symptoms and will continue serving the people of Pennsylvania as I isolate at home.
— Josh Shapiro (@JoshShapiroPA)
May 17, 2022
In a series of tweets Tuesday morning, Shapiro said he plans to get back on the campaign trail next week, and to kick off the general election in Johnstown.
“After these few days at home, I’m going to go win this race for Pennsylvania,” he said.
COVID was the leading cause of law enforcement deaths in 2022 for 3rd year in a row: Report
COVID-19 remained the leading cause of law enforcement deaths in 2022 despite the number attributed to the virus dramatically declining.
A new report released Wednesday by the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund looked at preliminary data and found that 226 federal, state, tribal and local law enforcement officers died last year while in the line of duty.
Of those deaths, 70 can be attributed to COVID-19.
However, this is an 83% decline compared to the 405 officers who died from COVID-19-related complications in 2021.
"While America's law enforcement officers are still battling the deadly effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been a significant reduction in such overall deaths, likely attributed to reduced infection rates and the broad availability and use of vaccinations," the report read.
Marcia Ferranto, CEO of NLEOMF, told ABC News to recognize an officer line of duty death from COVID as such, each case is reviewed by a medical team and then by a group of 13 law enforcement peers.
Law enforcement deaths National Law Enforcement
"At that point, it is determined whether this would be considered a line of duty death," she said.
"At this point, for 2022, we're looking at recognizing 70 of these COVID-related cases as official line of duty deaths and each one, tragic.
"
In 2021, 586 officers died in the line of duty, a 61% decline year-over-year, that can be attributed directly to the reduction of COVID-19 deaths.
According to the report, firearms-related incidents were the second-highest cause of death in 2022, followed by traffic-related incidents and other.
The "other" category included health-related deaths including heart attacks, stroke and effects from the September 11 attacks as well as accidents including aircraft crashes, falling objects, fires and falling to their deaths.
The report found that Texas had the highest number of law enforcement COVID-19 deaths with 16, followed by Illinois with six, New York with five, Alabama with four and Oklahoma and Tennessee with four each.
Overall, of the 226 fatalities, 204 were male and 22 were female.
The average age was 44 years old with an average of 15 years of service.
Additionally, each officer left an average of two children behind.
"These numbers bring it close to home and really humanize these men and women, these incredible men and women who are choosing law enforcement as their profession," Ferranto said.
She said an investment in officer safety and wellness programs can hopefully help drive down these numbers even further in 2023.
Since the COVID-19 pandemic began, only has the virus been the leading cause of death among law enforcement officers but firefighters and other protection service employees had the occupations with the highest death rates from COVID-19.
According to a recent report published by the National Center for Health Statistics -- a branch of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention -- those with protective service occupations had the highest COVID-19 death rate at 60.3 deaths per 100,000 workers in 2020.
This was twice as high as the overall workers' COVID-19 death rate in 2020, which sits at 28.6 per 100,000.
Police assist as a large crowd attempts to receive COVID-19 testing kits from city workers distributing the kits along Flatbush Avenue.
Dec. 24, 2021 in the Brooklyn borough of New York City.
Spencer Platt/Getty Images, FILE
The authors of the report said this was likely attributed to protective service employees not having jobs that allow them to stay at home as well as working in proximity to others -- both colleagues and the public -- increasing their risk of infection.
One of those deaths was Niagara Falls Police Department detective Kristina Zell, who passed away from a COVID-related illness in November 2022.
According to local affiliate WKBW, Zell began her career with the NFPD in March 2000 and worked her way up from patrol officer to a detective specializing in sex crime investigations.
In April 2020, shortly after COVID-19 first hit, African Americans represented 14 percent of Michigan’s population, but they made up 40 percent of those dying from the coronavirus, most in the greater Detroit area.
That disparity was laid out in graphic terms that month as reports and photos emerged that Detroit's Sinai-Grace Hospital was stacking bodies of the dead from COVID-19 in vacant rooms and propped on chairs as the coronavirus surged in southeastern Michigan.
Brian Taylor, a spokesman for the DMC, told the Detroit Free Press that COVID-19 "has caused significantly greater than normal mortality rates in the Detroit community."
Black residents make up about 78 percent of the city's population.
Advocates for health care reform note that the pandemic spotlighted an array of other racial health disparities in Michigan already evident for years.
That includes higher rates of diabetes, asthma and death from heart disease and hypertension among African Americans than the overall population, according to a state report based on census data from 2018 to 2020.
The state report noted links to social determinants of health for African Americans that include factors like poverty and lack of access to health care that can lead to poor health outcomes.
Moreover, infant mortality among Black children in Michigan, while declining in recent decades, still stands at nearly three times the rate of white infant deaths.
Nearly 25 percent of Michigan’s Black population was at or below the federal poverty level from 2018 to 2020, compared to 12.3 percent of the overall state population.
Twice the percentage of Black adults had no vehicle in their household compared to all state households, and 8.9 percent of the state African American population had no health insurance, compared to 6.5 percent of the state population.
Health care analysts say the reduction in African American deaths from COVID-19 suggests public health initiatives aimed at disparities in access and treatment can pay off.
“I think a lot of this can be credited to quick response and outreach (from the state) and getting vaccines out to those who need them,” said Jonathan Tsao, a researcher for the University of Michigan’s Center for Health and Research Transformation, a nonprofit health analysis organization.
Tsao said the steep reduction in deaths among Michigan African Americans may also be due to the fact that COVID-19 first hit areas of southeast Michigan with substantial Black populations, before moving on to other areas of the state.
“Those who suffer more from socio-economic factors were more susceptible to being exposed to COVID in the beginning, especially those who live in densely populated areas,” he said.
The task force report pointed to a number of strategies put in place over the past three years that paid off in reducing racial COVID-19 death disparities:
Neighborhood test sites
In August 2020, the task force supported test collection and test teams in 22 neighborhoods across Michigan, concentrated in Metro Detroit and Flint.
The selected sites were easy to travel to and “considered staples in their communities ” — places familiar to neighborhood residents — according to the report.
Between August 2020 and November 2022, neighborhood test sites hosted 7,365 different testing events and administered at least 364,104 COVID-19 tests, according to the report.
Of those who provided racial information, 57 percent were Black.
Mobile health units
Beginning in November 2020, nine mobile health units were launched in Genesee, Ingham, Kent, Muskegon, Wayne Counties, largely focused in areas with large Black populations.
Since June 2021, the mobile units have administered 52,460 COVID-19 tests and 28,308 COVID-19 vaccinations, according to the report.
Homebound vaccination
According to the report, Michigan’s Department of Health and Human Services collaborated with the Detroit Area Agency on Aging to provide COVID-19 vaccines to seniors who were not able to leave their homes in the Detroit area.
MDHHS later partnered with area agencies on aging across the state and by April 2021 had vaccinated about 21,000 homebound seniors.
Test to Treat sites
Test to Treat is a federally funded telehealth program targeted at access to lifesaving oral COVID-19 treatment including the drug Paxlovid for individuals at high risk.
According to the task force report, Michigan was the first state to fully implement the program and the only state to roll out the program at community and neighborhood testing sites that ranged from Detroit to Saginaw and Muskegon, as well as rural areas including Marquette and Albion, west of Jackson.
COVID-19 outbreaks in Australian residential aged care facilities – 24 February 2023
This weekly report provides a snapshot of data on the impact of COVID-19 in residential aged care facilities nationally.
The report includes data on the number of services impacted and number of staff and resident cases, as well as workforce, testing and PPE provided to affected services.
Waves of COVID-19 have risen and fallen since the virus first appeared in the US.
COVID-19 has presented in several ways, including in cases where there were no symptoms.
Yet, it's important to know what COVID-19 looks like when symptoms do occur.
But between the presence of different COVID-19 variants and the ability to get vaccinated against the illness, you may be wondering if the signs and symptoms of COVID-19 have changed over time.
Here's information on the COVID-19 symptoms to watch out for, how they look for people of all ages, how COVID-19 can progress, and more.
Getty Images
What Are the Symptoms of COVID-19?
Three symptoms—fever, cough, and shortness of breath—were initially recognized as core signs of COVID-19, and they remain among the list of things many people will experience over the course of the disease.
As of October 2022, the CDC notes that possible COVID-19 symptoms also include:
Fatigue
Muscle or body aches
Headache
New loss of taste or smell
Swollen tongue
Sore throat
Congestion or runny nose
Nausea or vomiting
Diarrhea
The CDC's rundown of signs to watch for doesn't list every possible symptom.
Although less common, COVID-19 can affect your skin, for example.
COVID toes and fingers are among the different types of rashes that have been associated with the infection.
Remember that the signs of this illness can be quite diverse.
In addition, how someone presents with COVID-19 may depend on the severity of the disease.
How Might COVID-19 Look?
On symptoms alone, COVID-19 can look a lot like the flu.
Common flu symptoms include:
Fever (or feeling feverish or having chills)
Cough
Sore throat
Runny or stuffy nose
Muscle aches
Headache
Fatigue
Shortness of breath is more common in people hospitalized with COVID-19.
One article noted that breathlessness occurred in 92% of hospitalized patients in intensive care units (ICUs) compared to 37% of patients in non-ICUs.
Complaints of fatigue, headache, and muscle pain are more common among people with milder illness from COVID-19 infection and who don't require hospitalization.
Symptoms like sore throat and runny nose or nasal congestion may be noticeable indicators in people with milder sickness.
Keep in mind that many people walk around not knowing they have COVID-19 because their symptoms are extremely mild, they think they have a cold, flu, or allergies, or they have no symptoms at all—in other words, they're asymptomatic.
If you've been vaccinated but experience a "breakthrough" infection, your symptoms are likely to be mild, if you have symptoms at all.
A CDC report noted that, among 469 COVID-19 cases, 347 individuals were fully vaccinated, and of those, 274 reported signs and symptoms—mostly cough, headache, sore throat, muscle pain, and fever.
What COVID-19 Looks Like in Older Adults
While fever, cough, and shortness of breath may be typical, older adults can present with fewer of the other common COVID-19 symptoms, like loss of smell, nausea, and diarrhea.
Still, many older adults have "atypical" presentations when it comes to COVID-19 infections.
Researchers reviewed inpatient medical records for nearly 5,000 adults ages 65 and older who were admitted to 11 New York-area hospitals during March and April 2020.
More than a third of the group presented with "atypical" symptoms, such as functional decline and altered mental status.
Other unexpected COVID-19 symptoms in older adults have included:
Unexplained hypoxia : Low oxygen levels in body tissues
: Low oxygen levels in body tissues Tachycardia :
Rapid heart rate, usually above 100 beats per minute
: Rapid heart rate, usually above 100 beats per minute Tachypnea:
Rapid breathing
What COVID-19 Looks Like in Children
Kids can have symptoms similar to adults, but most have mild symptoms.
Those symptoms might include:
Fever and cough (most common)
Sore throat
Rhinorrhea (runny nose)
Headache
Fatigue
Shortness of breath
Nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea
It's also important to note that symptoms can look like other illnesses in children.
Additionally, children can also be asymptomatic and show no symptoms of COVID-19 infection but may also be at risk for severe illness if they have other health conditions (e.g., obesity, diabetes, lung disorders).
How Does COVID-19 Progress?
The CDC explains that symptoms appear to arise in as few as two days after exposure to the virus or as long as 14 days.
This estimated time frame is similar to the incubation period of SARS and MERS, which are also types of coronaviruses.
However, the progression of COVID-19 varies widely.
As noted, some people initially have very mild symptoms, like headache or low-grade fever, while others experience no symptoms at all.
Additionally, some individuals are at high risk for developing severe sickness from a COVID-19 infection, like those who are older or have other health conditions (including conditions such as pregnancy, cancer, or a weakened immune system).
Possible Complications from Severe COVID-19 Illness Individuals who are at a higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19 may be more likely to experience: Hospitalization
Intensive care stays
The need for a ventilator for breathing There's also an increased risk of death for those who have one or more health conditions that may lead to severe sickness due to COVID-19.
If you think you've been exposed to COVID-19 or are experiencing fever or other symptoms, such as cough or difficulty breathing, get medical attention.
In addition, a person who is experiencing any of the following symptoms should seek immediate medical care:
Trouble breathing
Chest pain
New confusion
Trouble waking or staying awake
Bluish, gray, or pale lips or face
How Can You Protect Yourself From COVID-19?
The CDC recommends that people get COVID-19 vaccines and boosters as soon as possible and stay up to date on those shots.
As of November 2022, vaccines are available for individuals aged 6 months and older.
In addition, the vaccines authorized for use in the US can help protect you from getting seriously ill from COVID-19.
Still, while vaccination remains the number one means of controlling the spread of COVID-19, additional prevention strategies are needed to reduce transmission as well.
For example, people are urged to mask up based on the COVID-19 community level they are in, if they are sick, or caring for someone who is sick with COVID-29.
Masking is particularly important if you have a weakened immune system or if you have people in your household at increased risk for severe disease.
Additionally, other preventative measures include actions such as:
Moving indoor activities outdoors when possible
Spending more time outdoors in general
Making sure indoor areas are well ventilated
Increasing space and distance between yourself and others
Getting tested for COVID-19 if you've been exposed to it
Isolating with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 infections
Avoiding contact with others who may have suspected or confirmed COVID-19 infections
Getting treated for COVID-19—especially if you are at high risk of severe illness
A Quick Review
There are a number of COVID-19 symptoms such as coughing, fever, nausea, shortness of breath, and a runny nose.
However, not every person will have those symptoms or experience them the same way.
Signs of COVID-19 can especially look different in older adults and children.
Additionally, illness from COVID-19 may range from asymptomatic to very severe.
No matter how severe the illness, you'll want to seek medical attention to get the treatment that will work best for your case.
A new coronavirus variant, EG.5, now accounts for the largest proportion of Covid infections in the U.S., according to estimates from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Over a two-week period ending on Saturday, EG.5 — which some health experts on social media nicknamed “Eris” — made up an estimated 17.3% of new cases nationwide.
That’s up from just under 12% during the prior two-week period, and less than 1% as of late May.
EG.5, like the other strains that have gained dominance in the U.S. over the last year-plus, is a subvariant of omicron.
More precisely, it’s considered a descendant of the XBB lineage of the virus.
After EG.5, the next most common subvariant, XBB.1.16, accounts for just over 15% of new cases, while XBB.2.23 makes up around 11%.
Globally, EG.5 accounted for 11.6% of weekly cases in mid-July, up from 6.2% four weeks earlier, according to the World Health Organization.
The WHO has categorized it as a variant under monitoring, which is a step below variants of interest or concern.
The U.K. began monitoring for EG.5.1 — a descendant within the larger EG.5 umbrella — in July, according to the U.K. Health Security Agency.
As of July 20, the variant made up 14.5% of cases there.
The spread of EG.5 comes as the U.S. logs its first increase in hospitalizations of the year.
More than 9,000 people were hospitalized with Covid in the last week of July, up from about 6,300 at the end of June.
However, three experts interviewed for this story said there is not yet evidence that EG.5 is responsible for the rise in hospitalizations.
Plus, they said, this summer’s hospitalization rates are still relatively low, and far below the December 2022 peak of over 44,000 weekly Covid hospitalizations.
Dr. Dan Barouch, director of the Center for Virology and Vaccine Research at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, said there is no evidence that EG.5 infections cause more severe illness than other omicron subvariants.
EG.5 has likely evolved to become more transmissible than its predecessors, however, as evidenced by its prevalence, Barouch said.
But he suggested that widespread immunity from a combination of vaccinations and past infections should keep most people safe from severe illness.
“With EG.5 and likely future variants that will come through the summer, this fall, this winter, we will likely see an increased number of infections and cases,” Barouch said.
“But my hope is that we will not see a dramatic increase in severe disease because we have, what I call, a wall of population immunity.”
The updated Covid boosters set to be distributed this fall are not designed to target EG.5.
Rather, the Food and Drug Administration asked Moderna and Pfizer in June to target the XBB.1.5 subvariant in their new boosters, since that was the dominant strain at the time.
Pfizer said last week that it expects the FDA to sign off on its updated shot by the end of this month.
Experts said the new boosters may nonetheless offer some protection against EG.5, since the strain is similar to other XBB subvariants.
“They have nearly identical spike proteins, and that’s the basis of the vaccines,” said Andrew Pekosz, a virologist at Johns Hopkins University.
“So when the Covid boosters get available this fall, they should be a really nice match for this variant.”
Pekosz said it’s not yet known whether the CDC will issue a general recommendation that all people get the updated boosters, or just people over 60 years old.
Although some experts continue to debate the usefulness of new Covid boosters for the general population relative to those most vulnerable to severe illness, Pekosz said he thinks it would be smart for most people to get the new shots.
“It’s been a while since we had the bivalent boosters last year, and the variant XBB.1.5
and EG.5 are pretty different from what was in the last booster vaccine,” he said.
There is not yet clinical data about the most common symptoms of EG.5, but they’re unlikely to differ much from those caused by other omicron subvariants, according to Dr. Shan-Lu Liu, co-director of the Viruses and Emerging Pathogens Program at Ohio State University.
These symptoms include fever, cough, fatigue, muscle aches and headache.
“Once we entered the omicron era, the virus has changed from infecting the lungs to more infecting the upper airway,” Liu said.
“But symptoms should be pretty common to the previous SARS-CoV-2 infections."
CNN —
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention updated its recommendations on the Covid-19 vaccines on Wednesday to allow another dose of the bivalent booster for people who are 65 and older or who have weakened immune systems and who “want the option of added protection” against the coronavirus.
The move aligns with Tuesday’s US Food and Drug Administration actions to allow these groups to get additional booster doses ahead of the fall vaccination campaign.
On Wednesday, members of CDC’s Advisory Committee for Immunization Practices met to discuss the changes and expressed their support for them, although the committee did not vote.
Monovalent mRNA vaccines, which protect only against the original strain of the coronavirus, will no longer be recommended in the United States, the CDC says.
The updated bivalent shots from Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech protect against the original strain as well as the BA.4 and BA.5 subvariants of the Omicron variant.
The CDC now recommends the updated vaccines for everyone 6 and older, even if they didn’t finish the two-dose series of the original shots.
People who are 6 and older who have already gotten a dose of the updated vaccine do not need more shots now unless they’re 65 and older or have a weakened immune system, the agency says.
The updated boosters have been available in the US since September under emergency use authorizations, or EUAs, which restrict how they may be given.
The FDA amended these EUAs on Tuesday to allow certain groups to get an additional dose ahead of other people.
The FDA also urged anyone who hasn’t gotten their first dose of the bivalent booster to do so.
Only about 17% of eligible Americans – fewer than 1 in 5 – has gotten a recommended booster dose.
As time has passed, many adults with reduced immune function because of their age or an underlying health problem have been asking doctors whether they need another dose of the bivalent vaccines.
Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.
The CDC has reported early data showing that the effectiveness of the bivalent vaccines, even against emergency room visits and hospitalizations, has already started to wane.
But the agency had previously not been free to make a “permissive use” recommendation about the boosters that would allow doctors to offer additional doses to vulnerable people.
The FDA says it intends to make decisions about future vaccinations for most Americans after receiving recommendations on the fall strain composition from its advisory committee in June.
A University of Florida study sheds new light on the reason people who recover from a bout of severe COVID-19 are still at increased risk for death in the year after their recovery.
The culprit may be high levels of inflammation during the initial illness.
The UF team previously reported that patients who recovered from severe COVID-19 have more than twice the mortality risk within the year following their illness than people who have not contracted the virus.
The new findings, published in the journal Frontiers in Medicine, are the first to use biomarkers to help explain the increased risk.
“This study helps to clarify why people who are hospitalized with COVID-19 end up being at high risk for death after they recover.
The findings also take us to a new level of understanding of not just the mechanism for illness, but also a potential treatment that may prevent deaths among these patients,” said Arch G. Mainous III, Ph.D., the study’s lead investigator and a professor in the department of health services research, management and policy at the UF College of Public Health and Health Professions, part of UF Health, the university’s academic health center.
UF researchers analyzed electronic health records for more than 1,200 patients hospitalized for COVID-19 between Jan. 1, 2020 and Dec. 31, 2021 at one health system, and tracked the patients for up to one year following discharge.
After adjusting for factors including age, race, gender and select existing medical conditions, the scientists found that patients who had higher levels of inflammation during illness — as measured by a biomarker known as C-reactive protein — were 60% more likely to die within a year after infection than those who had lower levels of inflammation.
Previous studies have linked hyperinflammation and an overreaction of the immune system known as a cytokine storm to severe cases of COVID-19 and multi-organ damage.
The UF study suggests the health effects from such a severe inflammatory response persist well after patients recover.
The UF study also points to a potential treatment that may prevent deaths following COVID-19 recovery.
Health records revealed those patients who were prescribed an oral steroid at the time of hospital discharge had a lower risk of post-illness mortality than patients with severe COVID-19 who were not prescribed the anti-inflammatory drugs.
Taken together, the findings from the UF team on long-term mortality risks among patients who have had severe COVID-19 suggest a reconceptualization of the disease, Mainous said.
“This research allows us to see COVID-19 in a new way,” said Mainous, also vice chair for research in the UF College of Medicine’s department of community health and family medicine.
“Many have viewed COVID-19 as being similar to other infectious diseases; if you get rid of the virus or bacteria, the person is cured.
Because of the lingering health risks, we may need to shift our thinking to approach COVID-19 as both an acute and chronic condition.”
In addition to Mainous, the research team included Benjamin J. Rooks, M.S., a clinical research coordinator, and Frank A. Orlando, M.D., an assistant professor and assistant medical director, both in the department of community health and family medicine at the UF College of Medicine.
Media contact: Jill Pease, jpease@phhp.ufl.edu, 352-273-5816
REHOBOTH BEACH, Del. (AP) — First lady Jill Biden left COVID-19 isolation on Sunday after twice testing negative for the coronavirus and reunited with President Joe Biden at their Delaware beach home.
She had been isolating in South Carolina, where she tested positive for the virus as the couple wrapped up a vacation there last week.
The president made a brief stop at the White House before going to Wilmington, Delaware.
He arrived in Rehoboth Beach on Saturday night.
The White House announced Tuesday that the 71-year-old first lady had tested positive for the virus.
She first had symptoms last Monday.
Like the president, she has been twice-vaccinated and twice-boosted with the Pfizer COVID-19 vaccine.
President Biden, 79, recovered from a rebound case of the virus on Aug. 7.
Jill Biden was prescribed the antiviral drug Paxlovid and isolated for five days at the home on Kiawah Island, South Carolina, where they vacationed, before receiving negative results from two consecutive COVID-19 tests, spokeswoman Elizabeth Alexander said Sunday.
The first lady rejoined the president in Rehoboth Beach on Sunday afternoon, an aide said.
COVID-19 pandemic halted breast cancer screenings.
Here’s how long the delay lasted
A new study from Tulane University found that mammogram screening rates dropped precipitously in the first months of the pandemic.
(Photo by iStock)
The COVID-19 pandemic significantly disrupted routine medical checks for many.
A new study from Tulane University has found that, during the first wave of the pandemic, almost no women were receiving mammograms, and it took months for mammogram screening rates to return to normal.
Mammograms are crucial to detecting and diagnosing breast cancer.
The study, published in JAMA Network Open, examined data from nearly 45,000 female Medicaid beneficiaries in Louisiana and found that screening rates among those women decreased to nearly zero in April 2020.
It was not until September – five months later – that screening rates began to return to normal levels.
Mammogram screening rates fully recovered by mid-2021.
“Our study may provide new evidence of the association of the pandemic with screening mammography rates, especially for a low-income population in a Southern state,” said lead author Dr. Yixue Shao, a health policy and management researcher at Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine.
“The delayed breast cancer screening at the beginning of the pandemic may be associated with later-stage diagnoses or poorer prognoses for individuals with breast cancer.”
The study also examined differences in screening rates by race and ethnicity.
While non-Hispanic Black and Hispanic women saw the greatest increases in mammograms after the initial pandemic-induced decline, the study found “no significant differences in rate increases by race or ethnicity.”
Still, Shao said more work should be done to examine the effect of delayed screenings on those with breast cancer or those who had yet to be diagnosed.
The study is co-authored by Department of Health Policy and Management assistant professors Kevin Callison, Brigham Walker and Andrew Anderson and Thomas LaVeist, Weatherhead Presidential Chair in Health Equity and dean of the School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine.
The COVID-19 virus brought unprecedented challenges for VA, and the department has now released the latest Annex D report detailing VA’s supports for Veterans.
The report covers the time period covered by the previously released Annex D Interim Report.
The report includes descriptions of plans for moving forward after the conclusion of the public health emergency (PHE).
It also includes a review of past reports and updates on the progress VA has made.
Report covers homelessness
It covers homelessness, vaccinations, supply chain resilience strategies, workforce challenges and more.
End of the public health emergency
The PHE expired in May 2023.
Within the Annex D time period, VA conducted extensive planning for the end of the PHE, including changes in authorities and Federal funding.
The end of the PHE brought changes in telehealth care that required planning to assure sustained access and continuity of care for Veterans.
VA invested time and effort to determine the best way forward beyond the PHE to fully meet the needs of Veterans.
Past recommendations
In the Initial Report, VA recommended an accelerated incorporation of virtual care and a modernization strategy for its Clinical Contact Centers, expanding the center capabilities.
The Annex D Report also included interagency relationships, the Clinical Deployment Team program, supply chain, support for State Veterans Homes and VA workforce.
The path ahead
Through each of our challenges, we take the time to learn and grow from what we have faced.
VA knows the importance of examining its struggles and triumphs and finding ways to grow.
The Annex D Report speaks to the dedication and commitment of VA’s people who remain firmly focused on the important work of caring for our nation’s Veterans.
Dec. 6. photo of shoppers, some wearing masks, some not, make their way along Santee Alley in Los Angeles.
California will end its COVID-19 state of emergency on Feb. 28.
California’s COVID-19 state of emergency officially ends Tuesday, bringing a symbolic close to one of the most challenging chapters of state history and of Gov. Gavin Newsom’s political career.
The Democratic governor declared the state of emergency three years ago, giving himself broad executive powers to protect Californians from an unpredictable and deadly virus.
After previously resisting GOP pressure to end the emergency as conditions improved, Newsom now says California is finally ready to move forward.
“California is better prepared and that’s because we have a serious Legislature and the health ecosystem in California is second to none in the country,” Newsom said.
Advertisement
The governor proclaimed a state of emergency March 4, 2020, at a time when there were only 53 known cases of COVID-19 in California.
Anticipating rapid spread of the virus that could overwhelm hospitals, the proclamation gave the governor the legal authority to make, amend and rescind state regulations, suspend state statutes and redirect state funds.
The emergency declaration also allowed Newsom to commandeer private property, including hospitals, medical labs, hotels and motels.
Although the pandemic solidified Newsom’s legacy as a crisis governor, his use of power opened him up to scrutiny from across the political spectrum.
His decisions to enact mask and vaccine mandates and ever-shifting restrictions on businesses and everyday activities turned him into a GOP caricature of oppressive Democratic rule.
Newsom was spotted dining with lobbyist friends at the posh French Laundry restaurant in Napa Valley after advising Californians to avoid mixing with other households, leading to headlines across the country and criticism of him as a hypocritical leader.
After a Sacramento County Superior Court judge granted more time to gather petition signatures because of the pandemic, Republicans forced a vote to recall the governor the following year.
Critics also seized on the fact that Newsom’s children were attending classes at a private school while millions of California public school children were forced into distance learning programs from home.
Newsom handily defeated the recall campaign, but the French Laundry misstep frustrated even his staunchest supporters.
Meanwhile, leaders in his own party at times criticized his decisions.
Advertisement
“I think Gov. Newsom, like pretty much everybody else in California, is really sick of dealing with COVID,” said Jack Pitney, a professor of American politics at Claremont McKenna College.
California’s chief executive has been careful to avoid declaring victory over the virus, but in June 2021 he proclaimed at a reopening celebration at Universal Studios that the state was ready to “turn the page.”
Later that year, another wave of the virus led to more restrictions.
California currently has the 11th lowest COVID-19 death rate per capita in the country, according to data compiled by The Times.
The California Department of Public Health also reported this year that the state breached 100,000 deaths as a result of the virus.
Newsom recently said that his administration set the groundwork to end the state of emergency last year when he called off most of the remaining restrictions and began transitioning into a plan to live with the virus.
The governor added that California is moving in the same direction as the Biden administration, which announced plans to let the federal coronavirus public health emergency expire May 11.
The change won’t make much of a difference in the daily lives of most Californians but could eventually affect the cost of and access to treatment and preventive services.
California law requires health plans to cover the cost of COVID-19 therapeutics and vaccines and, until November, reimburse the cost of at-home tests.
Starting in early November, drugs and tests will be covered only if obtained from providers in patients’ insurance networks.
Advertisement
The situation is slightly less clear for the uninsured, who should be able to access the government’s stockpile of COVID-19 drugs and vaccines until at least this summer.
Federal government officials have said the Biden administration is seeking to ensure that supplies remain available beyond that time.
Robert Wachter, chair of UC San Francisco’s Department of Medicine, warned that any policy changes that make it more difficult for the uninsured to access free COVID-19 care, testing or vaccinations could pose health equity problems and as a result increase the threat of contracting COVID for all Californians.
“If you have a situation where more people are sick, feel sick, don’t know what they have, potentially are going into work and exposing themselves to other people and probably should be on Paxlovid, but don’t have access to it, that’s all bad,” Wachter said.
“In a perfect world, that wouldn’t happen.”
In preparation for the end of the emergency, Newsom called for new legislation to allow nurses to continue to dispense COVID-19 therapeutics and for laboratory workers to solely process COVID-19 tests.
Assemblyman Marc Berman (D-Menlo Park) introduced legislation to do that under AB 269, which passed the Assembly earlier this month and is expected to come up for a vote on the Senate floor this week.
The governor, accused by conservatives of abusing his powers, noted that California is ending its state COVID emergency while Republican-led Texas is not.
Texas is one of seven states with an emergency declaration still in place.
And similar to Newsom, Gov. Greg Abbott has been reluctant to give it up because of the broad powers he’s granted under an emergency declaration, said Randy Erben, an adjunct professor at the University of Texas School of Law and a former legislative director for Abbott.
Advertisement
After initially requiring masks in indoor public places from July 2020 until the following March, Abbott changed course months later and has used his emergency powers to prevent cities and counties from instituting their own mask requirements and vaccine mandates.
Although Newsom and Abbott took divergent paths, Erben said Abbott was “absolutely excoriated by the conservative right” for his early mask rules.
Unlike the criticism Newsom received from the GOP over restrictions and mandates, Abbott’s carried the added pressure of coming from within his own political party.
“I have every bit of sympathy for any chief executive of a state during the COVID pandemic,” Erben said.
“I just think there was no winning.
And I think that what they did in the beginning, and I’d say this about anyone, was heroic, and they took huge political risk in a time where nobody knew what the right answers were.”
President Joe Biden tested positive for Covid again late Saturday morning in a "rebound" case after testing negative several days in a row, his doctor said in a letter.
"After testing negative on Tuesday evening, Wednesday morning, Thursday morning and Friday morning, the President tested positive late Saturday morning, by antigen testing.
This in fact represents 'rebound' positivity," wrote White House physician Dr. Kevin O’Connor.
Biden, 79, has not experienced any re-emergence of symptoms and continues to feel well, O'Connor said.
"This being the case, there is no reason to reinitiate treatment at this time, but we will obviously continue close observation.
"
He will, however, return to strict isolation procedures, the doctor added.
A White House official said they are in the process of contact tracing to determine close contacts.
Vice President Kamala Harris is not considered a close contact, and tested negative for Covid-19 on Friday, according to her press secretary, Kirsten Allen.
Biden, who is fully vaccinated and twice boosted, tested positive for Covid on July 21 during a routine test, and was treated with the antiviral Paxlovid.
A small minority of people who take Paxlovid see a rebound effect.
Around 1% to 2% of people taking Paxlovid in Pfizer’s clinical trial tested positive for the coronavirus after having tested negative.
Rebound rates are around 5% among the tens of thousands of people who’ve taken the drug in real-life settings, White House Covid response coordinator, Dr. Ashish Jha, said at a recent news conference.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warned of the possible recurrences in May, and said that people who test positive again may still be contagious and should restart isolation for at least five days.
"Folks, today I tested positive for COVID again.
This happens with a small minority of folks," the president tweeted Saturday.
"I’ve got no symptoms
but I am going to isolate for the safety of everyone around me.
I’m still at work, and will be back on the road soon.
"
He left isolation Wednesday after five days.
At the time, O'Connor said his symptoms had almost completely resolved.
Biden on Thursday delivered remarks in the State Dining Room and participated in a roundtable with officials as well as some CEOs.
He did not wear a face mask at either event.
A White House official said Saturday that Biden would wear a mask around others through Day 10, in alignment with CDC guidance.
"When he was at a podium or similar circumstance we ensured that there is sufficient distance between him and others to allow him to safely remove his mask," the official said.
"He was at a safe distance from others at those events.”
Dr. Anthony Fauci, chief medical adviser to Biden, who had Covid in June, also said he went through Paxlovid rebound.
Overview
Please note that an addendum to this guidance has been published, which updates the reporting requirements to WHO as of 25 August 2023.
This document summarizes current WHO guidance for public health surveillance of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in humans caused by infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
The global goals to end the COVID-19 emergency are to reduce SARS-CoV-2 transmission and the impact of COVID-19 disease.
Surveillance remains fundamental to understanding the evolution of the virus, the risk factors for severe disease and the impact of vaccination and public health and social measures.
WHO continues to recommend maintaining and strengthening surveillance to achieve the core surveillance objectives for COVID-19 such as early warning for changes in epidemiological patterns, monitoring trends in morbidity and mortality, monitoring burden of disease on health care capacity and incorporating strategic and geographically representative genomic surveillance.
This guidance is specific to the current setting of the acute COVID-19 emergency as previous versions and includes the new elements below:
updated WHO case definitions, contact definitions, priority groups and settings in line with the latest contact tracing and quarantine guidance
updates of core and enhanced surveillance objectives and methods in various settings, including environmental and animal surveillance
updated guidance on surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 variants, including the integration of sampling for genomic surveillance in SARS-CoV-2 testing strategies
updates of COVID-19 surveillance reporting requirements to WHO, which includes the addition of new ICU admissions for COVID-19 treatment.
Related
Update to requirements for reporting COVID-19 surveillance data under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005):
Addendum to Public health surveillance for COVID-19 interim guidance, 25 August 2023
WHO COVID-19 Case definition
Global Surveillance of COVID-19: WHO process for weekly reporting aggregated data
See also: End-to-end integration of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza sentinel surveillance: revised interim guidance (31 January 2022)
Corrigenda (10 August 2022)
Following nearly a century of globalisation, successive global shocks and the movement to confront climate change appear to be turning the tide.
'Slowbalisation' following the 2008 financial crisis may be turning into deglobalisation.
But some regions and sectors are deglobalising faster than others.
In response to COVID-19, Russia’s war with Ukraine and climate change, governments and global companies are seeking security and resilience over the benefits of global value chains.
There are strong signals that the era of globalisation is coming to an end, analysis by research analysts at Barclays Corporate and Investment Bank suggests.
Sentiment is turning towards deglobalisation
The rise of globalisation was never entirely smooth or assured.
The reduction of global trade that was bookended by the two world wars was followed by 60 years of increased globalisation.
This included the hyper-globalisation period from 1990 to 2008.
However, the 2008 financial crisis, trade wars, disenfranchised middle classes in developed economies and rising concerns about over-reliance on trade with single partners led to a period of relatively stagnant "slowbalisation".
Since the end of the second world war, globalisation has surged — but that era may be coming to an end.
Image: Jorda-Schularick-Taylor Macrohistory Database.
Data 1960 onwards for World from IMG and World Bank, Barclays Research
Today, "slowbalisation" appears to be moving towards deglobalisation.
Recent disruptions to global value chains such as the COVID-19 pandemic, the war in Ukraine, growing ideological differences and the green transition have prompted governments and corporations to reconsider external dependencies.
They are looking closer to home and to trusted partners for more resilient growth models.
This sentiment is transcending media headlines and political posturing, and is becoming part of general corporate rhetoric.
According to Barclays’ Investment Sciences team, a small but notable fraction — 4% — of corporate transcripts mentioned onshoring in 2022.
Striking, when this has been under 1% prior to the pandemic.
Deglobalisation isn't completely global
While M&A (Mergers & Acquisitions) and jobs data suggest that deglobalisation is occurring, it is not happening uniformly across the planet.
Increased onshoring of jobs is taking place primarily in Asia.
Domestic employment is also increasing in the US and Europe, but this appears to balance local resignations, and the net trend in both regions is still towards globalisation, albeit among more junior roles.
Barclays also found evidence that fewer announced M&A deals have been completed recently than historical patterns would suggest.
Moreover, deals between target firms in Europe and North America are less likely to succeed when the acquirer is outside these regions, especially for target firms in industries such as advanced technology, finance and retail.
On the other hand, deals targeting firms in, for example, consumer staples, are more likely to succeed.
Similarly, the slowdown of M&A activity may not be caused solely by macroeconomic trends, but also by regulatory concerns, as the European Commission and the UK antitrust authority increase scrutiny on deals.
The slowdown of M&A activity may not be caused solely by macroeconomic trends, but also by regulatory concerns.
Image:
Barclays Research
Deglobalisation and the green transition
Energy is a key sector to watch in terms of both globalisation and deglobalisation.
The common incentive for nations to address climate change has been a major source of globalised cooperation in recent years.
Yet the mechanics of the green transition itself also necessitate a more local focus.
The push towards a long-term increase in the share of energy coming from renewables is being driven by the reduction of carbon-intensive transportation infrastructure and carbon pricing mechanisms acting as de facto tariffs.
Rising concerns about energy security and fossil fuel pricing volatility have also heightened interest in domestic renewables.
Energy is a key sector to watch in terms of both globalisation and deglobalisation.
Image: IEA
However, as the green transition is a global challenge, Barclays suggests it still needs a globalised approach — one that complements local and regional solutions.
Although the rise of renewables will fundamentally reshape fossil fuel trade flows, the green transition will have to be supported by the minerals industry that will be used to build its infrastructure.
This will result in the increased trade integration of mineral-endowed countries.
The era of globalisation may be coming to an end.
What replaces it remains to be seen, but it is clear that global cooperation is necessary to confront shared challenges.
DEERFIELD, Ill., October 12, 2022 - Walgreens now offers the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) authorized and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommended updated COVID-19 boosters to eligible individuals ages 5 years and older at select locations nationwide.
This press release features multimedia.
View the full release here: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20221012005973/en/
Scheduling an appointment is preferred and available starting today via the Walgreens app, 1-800-WALGREENS, or online at Walgreens.com/ScheduleVaccine.
Walgreens offers convenient, neighborhood locations and appointments that fit family schedules, including evenings and weekends.
The updated COVID-19 booster offers more effective protection against COVID-19, including Omicron BA.4 and BA.5, the latest variants and the dominant virus strains in the United States.
“With this expanded authorization, nearly everyone can receive the updated COVID-19 booster at Walgreens.
It is important that all eligible family members – both adults and children – get vaccinated with an updated booster dose, in addition to an annual flu shot to be protected this season,” said Anita Patel, PharmD, vice president, pharmacy services development, Walgreens.
“The booster for younger populations means added protection from a new COVID-19 infection, which will help alleviate concerns parents may have as their children attend school and participate in more activities indoors.”
The recent uptick in COVID-19 cases in the United Kingdom1 is being regarded as a warning sign that the U.S. will see a similar increase in COVID-19 activity soon as people are spending more time indoors and many respiratory viruses are circulating.
Therefore, getting up to date on recommended vaccines like the updated COVID-19 booster and flu shot remains a critical preventive measure to provide added protection and help lessen the severity of disease.
What Parents and Guardians Need to Know:
Expanded Eligibility.
Children ages 5-11 who completed a COVID-19 vaccine primary series or received a booster dose at least two months ago can now receive an updated COVID-19 booster dose.
Children ages 5 years and older are eligible to receive Pfizer’s updated COVID-19 booster dose, and children ages 6 years and older are eligible to receive Pfizer’s or Moderna’s updated COVID-19 booster dose.
Children ages 5-11 who completed a COVID-19 vaccine primary series or received a booster dose at least two months ago can now receive an updated COVID-19 booster dose.
Children ages 5 years and older are eligible to receive Pfizer’s updated COVID-19 booster dose, and children ages 6 years and older are eligible to receive Pfizer’s or Moderna’s updated COVID-19 booster dose.
Date of birth is needed to confirm eligibility.
Parents or legal guardians scheduling an appointment need to enter the birthdate of the child to be vaccinated to ensure they receive the appropriate vaccine.
Once confirmed, the scheduler will guide customers to locations where vaccines are available for their age group.
Parents or legal guardians scheduling an appointment need to enter the birthdate of the child to be vaccinated to ensure they receive the appropriate vaccine.
Once confirmed, the scheduler will guide customers to locations where vaccines are available for their age group.
A parent or guardian must be present.
All children must have a parent or legal guardian schedule an appointment on their behalf using Walgreens guest scheduling capabilities, and a parent or legal guardian must be present at the time of vaccination.
All children must have a parent or legal guardian schedule an appointment on their behalf using Walgreens guest scheduling capabilities, and a parent or legal guardian must be present at the time of vaccination.
Get protection from the flu at the same time.
To save a trip, children receiving an updated COVID-19 booster can also get a flu shot or other CDC recommended routine immunizations during a single visit.
A Trusted and Convenient Vaccination Destination
Walgreens pharmacy team members have administered over 70 million COVID-19 vaccinations to date.
Licensed pharmacists may administer recommended vaccinations to children ages 3 and older as part of the Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness (PREP) Act.
Walgreens is the largest pediatric vaccine provider among retail pharmacies and has extensive experience administering COVID-19 vaccines to eligible populations.
About Walgreens
Walgreens (www.walgreens.com) is included in the United States segment of Walgreens Boots Alliance, Inc. (Nasdaq: WBA), an integrated healthcare, pharmacy and retail leader serving millions of customers and patients every day, with a 170-year heritage of caring for communities.
As America’s most loved pharmacy, health and beauty company, Walgreens purpose is to champion the health and well-being of every community in America.
Operating nearly 9,000 retail locations across America, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, Walgreens is proud to be a neighborhood health destination serving approximately 9 million customers each day.
Walgreens pharmacists play a critical role in the U.S. healthcare system by providing a wide range of pharmacy and healthcare services.
To best meet the needs of customers and patients, Walgreens offers a true omnichannel experience, with fully integrated physical and digital platforms supported by the latest technology to deliver high-quality products and services in local communities nationwide.
1 Goodman, B. (2022, September 27).
Rising Covid-19 cases in the UK may be a warning for the US.
CNN.
Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2022/09/27/health/uk-fall-wave-covid-us/index.html.
View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20221012005973/en/
Scroll down to access downloads and media.
Downloads
COVID-19 vaccination – COVID-19 vaccines approved for children aged 5 to 11 years (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people)
We aim to provide documents in an accessible format.
If you're having problems using a document with your accessibility tools, please contact us for help.
Publication date: 27 February 2023
Date last updated: 10 March 2023
Publication type: Fact sheet
Audience:
General public
Placing a spotlight on the progress of Pathfinding countries
Leadership and action by governments are crucial in our global fight to end violence against children.
Policies, national planning, long-term investment and evidence-based interventions drive large-scale, lasting change.
Countries are also key stakeholders in our international efforts – sharing solutions, strengthening international cooperation and supporting the work of other governments and national actors.
In this series, End Violence is highlighting the recent impact of Pathfinding countries, showcasing progress being made to keep children safe at home, at school online and in communities.
The Government of Japan is committed to ending violence against children.
A key partner and Board Member of the End Violence Partnership, Japan became a Pathfinding country in 2018, when it made a formal, public commitment to end all forms of violence against children through national planning and action.
The country has since been on the frontlines of protecting children, within its borders and internationally.
And through a turbulent 2021, when the world grappled with rebuilding from the COVID-19 pandemic, Japan stepped up efforts to protect children from violence at a time of heightened risks.
In 2021, the Government of Japan with support from the End Violence Partnership moved toward progress with a diverse portfolio of large-scale efforts, including:
National planning: Japan launched its National Action Plan to End Violence Against Children.
It incorporates the evidence-based INSPIRE strategies and was developed collaboratively with a powerful multi-stakeholder partnership.
Japan’s National Action Plan focuses on the priority areas of child abuse, sexual exploitation, bullying and corporal punishment, along with mitigating the impact of COVID-19 on violence against children.
The government also heard the voices and concerns of children through online public comments and developed a child-friendly version of the plan, which includes a government hotline number for consultations Japan presented this plan in a high-level session, alongside Colombia and Finland.
The countries discussed their targets and experience in prioritising child protection and wellbeing by developing, coordinating, costing and most importantly, implementing their national action plans.
Japan launched its National Action Plan to End Violence Against Children.
It incorporates the evidence-based INSPIRE strategies and was developed collaboratively with a powerful multi-stakeholder partnership.
Japan’s National Action Plan focuses on the priority areas of child abuse, sexual exploitation, bullying and corporal punishment, along with mitigating the impact of COVID-19 on violence against children.
The government also heard the voices and concerns of children through online public comments and developed a child-friendly version of the plan, which includes a government hotline number for consultations Japan presented this plan in a high-level session, alongside Colombia and Finland.
The countries discussed their targets and experience in prioritising child protection and wellbeing by developing, coordinating, costing and most importantly, implementing their national action plans.
Investment:
Japan committed US$1.39 million to help fellow Pathfinding countries Uganda and Kenya protect children from violence by adopting evidence-based and cost-effective parenting programmes in the context of COVID-19.
The End Violence Partnership implemented the project in collaboration with UNICEF, Parenting for Lifelong Health, Makerere University and other partners.
Japan committed US$1.39 million to help fellow Pathfinding countries Uganda and Kenya protect children from violence by adopting evidence-based and cost-effective parenting programmes in the context of COVID-19.
The End Violence Partnership implemented the project in collaboration with UNICEF, Parenting for Lifelong Health, Makerere University and other partners.
Convening international leaders: Japan also co-hosted a high-level, international event about prohibiting corporal punishment – the most common form of violence against children – via the Together to #ENDviolence global campaign.
The event aimed to accelerate progress towards the universal prohibition of violent forms of punishment, providing an opportunity for governments to share lessons, for civil society organisations to share insights and importantly, for youth to share their experiences.
The Government of Japan has fully and explicitly prohibited corporal punishment since 2020.
And during the COVID-19 lockdowns, it has stepped up its efforts to raise public awareness on the issue and promote positive parenting.
In 2018, Japan helped create End Violence’s humanitarian funding window.
Their US$5.9 million contribution helped 12 organisations protect children affected by conflict in Nigeria and Uganda.
In just over a year, these projects led to the release of over 1,900 children from armed groups, and the provision of psychosocial support to nearly 70,800 children and caregivers.
In 2019, the Government of Japan also enacted a law to amend the Child Welfare Act, which strengthened measures to prevent child abuse and prohibit corporal punishment.
And during COVID-19, they carried out the Reinforced Action Plan to Watch Over Children, a strategy to detect and address child abuse by mobilising local networks and supporting monitoring mechanisms.
Japan is committed to continuing and strengthening its fight to end violence against children.
On 14 June 2022, H.E. Mr. Jun SHIMMI, Ambassador for Human Rights and International Peace and Stability, the Government of Japan, spoke at the Together to #ENDviolence Leaders’ Event to reiterate this commitment.
With heads of state, royalty, UN leadership, children and survivors of childhood violence, it was one of the most diverse and influential groups that have ever come together solely to focus on ending violence against children.
H.E. Jun Shimmi highlighted the steps Japan is taking and called for the international community to cooperate to achieve this.
Use End Violence’s interactive Country Dashboard to track milestones and progress from Japan and other Pathfinding countries around the world, and explore our 2021 Annual Report to read more about the journey of progress, case studies on more countries, and collective action by our 700+ diverse partners.
Image: Johannes Waibel / Unsplash
Action to #ENDviolence
Despite the global challenges society faces today, positive change for children is taking place across countries and sectors – driven by governments, individuals and organisations fighting to ensure safe, secure and nurturing childhoods for girls and boys.
As part of the Together to #ENDviolence campaign, we are placing a spotlight on these dedicated efforts that are delivering impact.
EXPLORE ACTION TO #ENDViolence FROM AROUND THE WORLD.
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus is a site for RECOVER, a study that aims to probe the mysteries of long COVID, a condition that plagues millions of people after they recover from COVID-19.
Frances Rossi’s enduring encounter with COVID-19 began in mid-February 2020.
What she thought was a common cold had an unusual twist.
At the time, Rossi directed three choirs for a Catholic church in Denver.
So it was a problem when she found she’d strangely lost one-third of her voice.
“It knocked out the middle range,” she recalled.
“I could sing high and low but not in the middle at all.
It absolutely wiped it out.”
A nagging dry cough also bothered Rossi, as well as sinus pressure and draining.
She noticed after the cold that she could no longer walk up two flights of stairs in the church without holding the railing and having help with her guitar and sheet music.
Just before the cold, she’d completed the trip without assistance.
As the days wore on, Rossi suffered a slew of additional, fluctuating symptoms, including dizziness, lightheadedness, nausea, heart palpitations, chest tightness, changes in blood pressure, redness in her fingers and toes, and extreme fatigue.
In these early days of the pandemic – the first case in the United States had been confirmed only in late January – Rossi had trouble getting a COVID-19 test.
But she knew there was nothing common about her cold.
“All I knew was something was going on and not resolving,” she said.
As the symptoms persisted through the spring of 2020, Rossi did her own research and was convinced she had COVID-19.
It wasn’t until June, however, that an antibody test at UCHealth confirmed that she’d been infected.
More than two years later, however, Rossi still battles post-COVID symptoms, particularly chronic fatigue.
She is one of millions of people in the United States with long COVID, meaning first-time symptoms that persist for three or more months after the original infection.
Rossi is also part of a massive nationwide initiative to study long COVID, uncover its roots and develop new treatments and therapies for the condition, which remains notoriously difficult to pin down.
Long COVID research study site
The University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus is a recruitment site for the $1.15 billion National Institutes of Health-funded study, dubbed RECOVER.
The four-year long COVID research study is enrolling and following patients from three groups: those who had COVID-19 and experienced long COVID symptoms, those who recovered without long COVID symptoms and healthy controls.
Recruits will complete baseline questionnaires and blood draws, with researchers using the information gleaned to search for clues to what drives the dizzying array of symptoms that plague long COVID sufferers like Frances Rossi.
“The bloodwork will hopefully delve into the mechanisms, such as the body’s immune response, inflammation and changes to the microbiome, that might underlie those who go on to develop long-term symptoms,” said Dr. Kristine Erlandson, co-principal site investigator for the RECOVER study and an associate professor of Medicine – Infectious Diseases at the University of Colorado School of Medicine.
“The trial is also designed to serve as a platform to roll out future intervention studies,” Erlandson added.
In turn, the promise of trials for new therapies may encourage patients to join the RECOVER study, she said.
Long COVID study seeks new recruits — fast
Quickening the enrollment pace is a priority.
The total national recruitment goal for adults, children and pregnant women is 40,000.
As of early August, the trial had recruited nearly 6,800 adults, less than half the goal of 17,000.
In Colorado, researchers hope to recruit 360 patients from UCHealth and Denver Health, Erlandson said.
As of late July, she reported, about 80 patients had been recruited from UCHealth, with another 60 or so coming from Denver Health.
To boost that number, the trial team recently hired a half-dozen new study coordinators, she added.
“We’re looking forward to a massive recruitment push,” Erlandson said.
That push won’t focus on long COVID patients.
Erlandson said that self-referrals, as well as those from long COVID providers like the UCHealth Post-COVID Clinic, quickly filled those slots and created a waiting list of around 500.
Per instructions from NIH, the study is now pursuing patients diagnosed with COVID-19 within the past four weeks, as well as those who have never been infected.
With variations in the SAR-CoV-2 virus allowing COVID-19 to stubbornly hang on in communities, finding uninfected people has presented a bigger recruitment challenge than expected, Erlandson said.
“One of the difficulties we’ve had has been finding people in the uninfected population,” she said.
“That number has been decreasing.”
Erlandson encouraged people who have never had COVID-19 to contact the study, even if they have comorbidities like diabetes or cardiovascular problems.
Their contributions could further reveal the subtleties of long COVID.
For example, how, if at all, does first-time shortness of breath differ in a patient with long COVID from the same problem in an uninfected patient with heart disease?
Goal is to boost enrollment in underserved communities
The Colorado team is also working on an entrenched clinical trial recruitment problem: increasing enrollment among racial and ethnic minorities, Erlandson said.
It’s a goal specifically stated in the RECOVER adult study protocol.
It won’t be sufficient to rely on self-referrals to address the issue, she added.
“We’re shifting our strategies to our community engagement group,” Erlandson said.
“We want to focus on recruiting some of the underrepresented populations in research that have been disproportionately affected by COVID.”
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention note the risk of hospitalization from a COVID-19 infection for Black people and Hispanic people was more than double than for white people.
The comparative risk was nearly triple for American Indians and Alaska Natives.
The NIH-funded effort to address “the disparate impact of COVID-19 on racial and ethnic populations” began with the Community Engagement Alliance (CEAL), said Dr. Donald Nease, a Family Medicine physician at UCHealth AF Williams Family Medicine Clinic – Central Park and professor of Family Medicine with the CU School of Medicine.
Nease is co-principal investigator for CO-CEAL, the Colorado chapter of the national alliance.
It’s a partnership between the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus and a host of community and state organizations.
A statewide effort to engage communities in long COVID research
CO-CEAL launched in April 2021, focusing on improving education and countering disinformation about COVID-19 and vaccinations in American Indian/Alaska Native and Black and Hispanic urban and rural communities.
These spanned the Denver metro area, Pueblo, Fort Morgan, Weld County and the San Luis Valley.
The group received funding for a second year in March, Nease said.
In the first phase, CO-CEAL worked closely with community members on two rounds of projects that included funding a video targeted at Black people that explained COVID-19 vaccines and why they were important; informational posters displayed on buses and at stops; links for more information about COVID-19; and information distributed at community meetings, Nease said.
A second round focused on childhood vaccination, with Hispanic communities in the Denver area and the San Luis Valley independently deciding to use coloring books to help kids and their parents learn more about COVID-19 and how vaccines help to protect people from the disease.
Nease said CO-CEAL is now working with the RECOVER team to boost study enrollment among those hard-hit communities.
That’s been a challenge throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, he said
“One of the things we saw very early on in some of the vaccine trials is that we weren’t reaching into the communities that were being pretty significantly impacted by COVID-19,” he said.
“We saw that as something that needed to be addressed.”
Nease said CO-CEAL’s Community Clinical Trials Advisory Board has been meeting to discuss effective ways to get word of the RECOVER study out to Denver residents.
The possibilities include using Denver Health’s network of primary care clinics that already serve as recruitment sites.
Research liaisons with the Colorado Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute (CCTSI) who have contacts in communities with large racial and ethnic populations could also play a valuable role, Nease said.
In the near future, CO-CEAL plans community meetings for people to ask questions about the RECOVER study, Nease said.
It’s the responsibility of recruiters, he added, to explain in plain language the benefits of the trial, not just to the scientific community, but to ordinary people.
“We find that the number-one thing is about trust and how we bring trusted messages to the community,” Nease said.
“By listening to clergy and others closely connected to the communities, we can get our message out.
We also want to be totally transparent about where we lack information about long COVID.
The whole purpose is to build more understanding.”
Nease said he’ll attend meetings on the long COVID research study with co-PI Dr. Ricardo Gonzalez Fisher, a physician and researcher who works closely with Mexican immigrants and other underserved communities and is bilingual.
He added that Gordon Duvall, a Clinical Trials Advisory Board member, will help to disseminate RECOVER study recruitment information at Aurora’s Salud Family Health Center, where he serves as medical and education director.
As one already enrolled in the RECOVER study, Frances Rossi hopes that her participation helps to shed light on long COVID and her frustrating issues with it.
The pandemic ended her position as choir and music director, leaving her to play guitar and sing Sundays only at another church.
Still, she gains sustenance from her music and from six grandchildren, two of whom lived in Denver until recently.
Rossi also belongs to a long COVID support group on Facebook.
The online exchanges were especially helpful during the early, confusing days of her illness.
“The group was a total revelation because I started hearing from people who had the same symptoms I had,” Rossi recalled.
“I found I was not an isolated case and that it wasn’t just my body doing weird things.”
Some of the early symptoms linger, including concentration problems, occasional shortness of breath, chest tightness, and especially fatigue.
“I’ll think I’m over this.
I have some energy, get excited and start doing things,” Rossi said.
“Then I’ll overdo it and get back in the same pattern of exhaustion.”
She said she’s learned to conserve her energy for important things that will require exertion, like singing on Sunday or spending time with her grandchildren.
She finds her mind as well as her body needs more rest.
“There are times I know I’ve reached my capacity and my mind starts to shut down,” she said.
Small but important changes bother her.
For example, Rossi has noticed that while she crotchets, she sometimes now has difficulty keeping track of the number of stitches.
“I have to say aloud the number I am on,” she said.
Rossi said she decided to join the RECOVER study both for herself and for others.
“I feel like I want to be able to share my experience and I’m hoping that can help somebody understand the disease better.
I’d like to contribute to that,” she said.
She also has a more personal purpose.
“I want people to know that long COVID is real, and I would like them to know that long COVID is a reason not to get COVID in the first place,” Rossi said.
“Even someone who thinks they are very healthy can get these long-lasting aftereffects from the disease.
You may get through COVID just fine, but that may not be the end of it for you.”
To learn more about enrolling in the study, click here.
To receive continuing education (CE) for WC4520-050522 – Clinician Outreach and Communication Activity (COCA) Calls/Webinars – Evaluating and Supporting Patients Presenting with Cognitive Symptoms Following COVID, Thursday, May 5, 2022, please visit TCEO and follow these 9 Simple Steps by Monday, June 6, 2022.
To receive continuing education (CE) for WD4520-050522 – Clinician Outreach and Communication Activity (COCA) Calls/Webinars – Evaluating and Supporting Patients Presenting with Cognitive Symptoms Following COVID, Thursday, May 5, 2022, (Web on Demand), please visit TCEO and follow these 9 Simple Steps between Tuesday, June 7, 2022, and Friday, June 7, 2024
In support of improving patient care, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is jointly accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education (ACCME), the Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education (ACPE), and the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC), to provide continuing education for the healthcare team.
CME: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention designates this activity for a maximum of 1 AMA PRA Category 1 Credits™.
Physicians should claim only the credit commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity.
AAPA CME: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been authorized by the American Academy of PAs (AAPA) to award AAPA Category 1 CME credit for activities planned in accordance with AAPA CME Criteria.
This activity is designated for 1 AAPA Category 1 CME credits.
Approval is valid until 12/13/2023.
PAs should only claim credit commensurate with the extent of their participation
CNE: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention designates this activity for 1 nursing contact hours.
CPE: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention designated this (Knowledge-based) event for pharmacists to receive 0.1 CEUs in pharmacy education.
The Universal Activity Number is JA4008229-0000-22-032-L04-P and enduring JA4008229-0000-22-033-H04-P.
Once credit is claimed, an unofficial statement of credit is immediately available on TCEOnline.
Official credit will be uploaded within 60 days on the NABP/CPE Monitor.
CEU: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is authorized by IACET to offer 0.1 CEU’s for this program.
CECH: Sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, a designated provider of continuing education contact hours (CECH) in health education by the National Commission for Health Education Credentialing, Inc.
This program is designated for Certified Health Education Specialists (CHES®) and/or
Master Certified Health Education Specialists (MCHES®) to receive up to 1.0 total Category
I continuing education contact hours.
Maximum advanced level continuing education contact hours available are 1.
Continuing Competency credits available are 1.
CDC provider number 98614.
AAVSB/RACE:
This program was reviewed and approved by the AAVSB RACE program for 1.0 hours of continuing education.
Participants should be aware that some boards have limitations on the number of hours accepted in certain categories and/or restrictions on certain methods of delivery of continuing education.
Please contact the AAVSB RACE program at race@aavsb.org if you have any comments/concerns regarding this program’s validity or relevancy to the veterinary profession.
For Certified Public Health Professionals (CPH): The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is a pre-approved provider of Certified in Public Health (CPH) recertification credits and is authorized to offer 1 CPH recertification credits for this program.
DISCLOSURE:
In compliance with continuing education requirements, all planners and presenters must disclose all financial relationships, in any amount, with ineligible companies over the previous 24 months as well as any use of unlabeled product(s) or products under investigational use.
CDC, our planners, and presenters wish to disclose they have no financial relationship(s) with ineligible companies whose primary business is producing, marketing, selling, re-selling, or distributing healthcare products used by or on patients, with the exception of Dr. Talya Fleming who would like to disclose that she received a research grant from NuStep and served as co-principal investigator for Stroke Rehabilitation Clinical Research Trial.
All grant funds are received and managed by hospital organization.
All of the relevant financial relationships listed for this individual has been mitigated.
Content will not include any discussion of the unlabeled use of a product or a product under investigational use.
CDC did not accept financial or in-kind support from ineligible companies for this continuing education activity.
On Jan. 30, 2023, the Biden Administration announced it will end the public health emergency (and national emergency) declarations on May 11, 2023.
Here’s what major health policies will and won’t change when the public health emergency ends.
Vaccines
What’s changing: Nothing.
The availability, access, and costs of COVID-19 vaccines, including boosters, are determined by the supply of federally purchased vaccines, not the public health emergency.
What’s the same: As long as federally purchased vaccines last, COVID-19 vaccines will remain free to all people, regardless of insurance coverage.
Providers of federally purchased vaccines are not allowed to charge patients or deny vaccines based on the recipient’s coverage or network status.
Although a federal rule temporarily required private insurers to reimburse out-of-network providers for vaccine administration during the public health emergency, vaccine access will be unaffected by insurers ending these payments, as long as federal supplies last, because vaccine providers are not allowed to deny anyone a federally purchased vaccine based the recipient’s coverage or network status and must not charge any out-of-pocket costs.
Due to the Affordable Care Act and other recent legislation, even after the federal supply of vaccines is gone, vaccines will continue to be free of charge to the vast majority of people with private and public insurance.
However, costs may become a barrier for uninsured and underinsured adults when federally purchased doses are depleted, and privately insured people may then need to confirm their provider is in-network.
For more on what happens after the federal supply of vaccines runs dry, see our briefs on the commercialization of COVID vaccines and the expected growth in prices for COVID vaccines.
Importantly, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)’s emergency use authorizations for COVID-19 vaccines (and treatments and tests) will remain in effect, as they are tied to a separate emergency declaration, not the public health emergency that ends in May.
At-home COVID tests
What’s changing: At-home (or over-the-counter) tests may become more costly for people with insurance.
After May 11, 2023, people with traditional Medicare will no longer receive free, at-home tests.
Those with private insurance and Medicare Advantage (private Medicare plans) no longer will be guaranteed free at-home tests, but some insurers may continue to voluntarily cover them.
For those on Medicaid, at-home tests will be covered at no-cost through September 2024.
After that date, home test coverage will vary by state.
A temporary Medicaid coverage option adopted by 15 states has given uninsured people access to COVID-19 testing services, including at-home tests, without cost-sharing but that program will end with the public health emergency.
What’s the same: Uninsured people in most states were already paying full price for at-home tests as they weren’t eligible for the temporary Medicaid coverage for COVID testing services.
Uninsured and other people who cannot afford at-home tests may still be able to find them at a free clinic, community health center, public health department, library, or other local organization.
Additionally, some tests have been provided by mail through the federal government, though supply is diminishing.
PCR and rapid tests ordered or administered by a health professional
What’s changing: Although most insured people will still have coverage of COVID tests ordered or administered by a health professional, these tests may no longer be free.
For people with traditional Medicare, there will be no cost for the test itself, but there could be cost-sharing for the associated doctor’s visit.
For people with Medicare Advantage and private insurance, the test and the associated doctor’s visit both might be subject to cost-sharing, depending on the plan.
Additionally, some insurers might begin to limit the number of covered tests or require tests be done by in-network providers.
People in grandfathered or non-ACA-compliant plans will have no guarantee of coverage for tests and may have to pay full-price.
For people with Medicaid, there will continue to be free tests through September 2024, after which point, states may limit the number of covered tests or impose nominal cost-sharing.
Uninsured people in the 15 states that have adopted the temporary Medicaid coverage option will no longer be able to obtain COVID-19 testing services, including at-home tests, with no cost-sharing as this program ends with the public health emergency.
What’s the same: Uninsured people in most states were not eligible for the temporary Medicaid pathway for COVID testing and therefore will continue to pay full price for tests unless they can get tested through a free clinic or community health center.
COVID Treatment
What’s changing: People with public coverage may start to face new cost-sharing for pharmaceutical COVID treatments (unless those doses were purchased by the federal government, as discussed below).
Medicare beneficiaries may face cost-sharing requirements for certain COVID pharmaceutical treatments after May 11.
Medicaid and CHIP programs will continue to cover all pharmaceutical treatments with no-cost sharing through September 2024.
After that date, these treatments will continue to be covered; however, states may impose utilization limits and nominal cost-sharing.
What’s the same: Any pharmaceutical treatment doses (e.g. Paxlovid) purchased by the federal government are still free to all, regardless of insurance coverage.
This is based on the availability of the federal supply and is not affected by the end of the public health emergency.
Most insured people already faced cost-sharing for hospitalizations and outpatient visits related to COVID treatment.
Private insurers were never required to waive cost-sharing for any COVID treatment.
Though some did so voluntarily, most insurers had already phased out these waivers more than a year ago.
Telemedicine
What’s changing: Some flexibilities associated with providing health care via telehealth during the public health emergency will end.
During the public health emergency, providers writing prescriptions for controlled substances were allowed to do so via telemedicine, but in-person visits will be required after May 11.
Because of the pandemic, all states and D.C. temporarily waived some aspects of state licensure requirements so that providers with equivalent licenses in other states could practice remotely via telehealth.
Some states tied those policies to the end of the federal public health emergency so those policies may end unless those states change their policy.
The Department of Health and Human Services temporarily waived penalties against providers using technologies that don’t comply with federal privacy and security rues in the provision of telehealth services during the public health emergency.
Enforcement of these rules when the public health emergency ends will restrict the provision of telehealth to so-called “HIPAA compliant” technologies and communication productions.
What’s the same: Expanded telehealth for Medicare beneficiaries was once tied to the public health emergency
but, due to recent legislation, will remain unchanged through December 31, 2024.
Most private insurers already covered telemedicine before the pandemic.
In Medicaid, states have broad authority to cover telehealth without federal approval.
Most states have made, or plan to make, some Medicaid telehealth flexibilities permanent.
Discussion
Overall, the widest ranging impact from the end of the public health emergency will likely be higher costs for COVID tests – both at-home tests and those performed by clinicians.
As many Americans delay or go without needed care due to cost, the end of free COVID tests could have broad implications for the people’s ability to get timely COVID diagnoses or prevent transmission.
Other changes to health policies that are tied to the public health emergency, national emergency, and other declarations are discussed in more detail in our earlier brief.
Further, and potentially more significant, changes will come when federal supplies of vaccines, treatments, and tests are depleted, though the timing of that is yet to be determined and is not tied to the public health emergency.
The Biden administration has announced that it has no further funding for vaccines, tests, or treatments, and that Congress would need to make more funding available.
Importantly, continuous enrollment for Medicaid enrollees – which has led to record-high enrollment in Medicaid – was once tied to the end of the public health emergency.
However, recent legislation decoupled this provision from the public health emergency and ends continuous enrollment on March 31, 2023.
States can begin disenrolling people from Medicaid as early as April 1, 2023, though most states will take a year to complete these disenrollments.
KFF has estimated that millions of people will lose Medicaid coverage during this unwinding period.
Covid-19 drove a dramatic increase in the number of women who died from pregnancy or childbirth complications in the U.S. last year, a crisis that has disproportionately claimed Black and Hispanic women as victims, according to a government report released Wednesday.
The report lays out grim trends across the country for expectant mothers and their newborn babies.
It finds that pregnancy-related deaths have spiked nearly 80% since 2018, with Covid-19 being a factor in a quarter of the 1,178 deaths reported last year.
The percentage of preterm and low birthweight babies also went up last year, after holding steady for years.
And more pregnant or postpartum women are reporting symptoms of depression.
“We were already in the middle of a crisis with maternal mortality in our country,” said Karen Tabb Dina, a maternal health researcher at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
“This really shows that Covid-19 has exacerbated that crisis to rates that we, as a country, are not able to handle.”
The nonpartisan U.S. Government Accountability Office, which authored the report, analyzed pregnancy-related deaths after Congress mandated that it review maternal health outcomes in the 2020 coronavirus relief bill.
The maternal death rate in the U.S. is higher than many other developed nations and had been on the rise in the years leading up to the pandemic, but Covid-19 has only worsened conditions here for pregnant women.
Women who contract the virus while pregnant face elevated health risks.
Staffing shortages and Covid-19 restrictions created more hurdles for expecting mothers to get in-person health care; and pandemic stress has intensified depression, a common condition during pregnancy.
Mental health issues likely contributed to the increase in pregnancy-related deaths, Tabb Dina said.
Many women who experience depression and anxiety during or after their pregnancy struggle to get the care they need.
“Mental health is the greatest complication in pregnancy that we don’t understand,” she said.
The biggest spike in deaths came during July through December of last year, as the Covid-19 delta variant infected millions, noted Carolyn Yocom, a director at the Government Accountability Office.
“It’s really clear from the data that the time in which the delta variant spread seemed to correspond to a huge increase in deaths,” Yocom said.
The maternal death rate is particularly stark for Black women, who have long faced worse maternal outcomes than their peers.
Pregnancy-related deaths for every 100,000 births climbed from 44 in 2019 to 68.9 among Black women last year.
White women had death rates of 26.1 last year, a jump from 17.9 in 2019.
Death rates among Hispanics had been on the decline, but they swelled again during the pandemic from 12.6 per 100,000 in 2019 to 27.5 last year.
Black and Hispanic people have also died at higher rates from Covid-19, in part because they have less access to medical care and more often work essential jobs that expose them to the virus.
Long before Covid-19 began spreading, the stage was set for Black, low-income and rural women to receive subpar pregnancy care —putting them at further risk for their pregnancies to go wrong, according to a separate GAO report.
Hospitals have been shedding their obstetric services in rural areas, low-income and majority Black communities, that report said.
More than half of rural counties didn’t have a hospital offering pregnancy care as of 2018, the review found.
“The loss of hospital-based obstetric services in rural areas is associated with increases in out-of-hospital births and pre-term births, which may contribute to poor maternal and infant outcomes,” the report found.
Before we turn to our main results on participants’ vaccination motives, we analyze the determinants of people’s confidence in COVID-19 vaccines.
Confidence in COVID-19 Vaccines
We analyze in this section the determinants of people’s confidence in the vaccine’s efficacy and their fear of side effects.
Overall, we find that 90% of people who approached the vaccination centers expected their booster COVID-19 vaccination, which corresponds to their third vaccination.
Whereas, 7% (3%) of the people did not receive any (received one) COVID-19 vaccination before.
The findings are in line with the German phenomenon of that time, that only a small percentage of people approached vaccination centers to receive their initial vaccination.
Unfortunately, due to the small percentage of initial vaccinees, we cannot investigate people’s motivations for late initial vaccinations.
Figure 1
The determinants of people’s confidence in the vaccine and of their fear of side effects.
Full size image
We start our analysis with an overview on the impact of our principal components (PCs).
Figure 1 displays an overview on the relation of our PCs on the “efficacy of the vaccine” (left panel) and their “fear of side effects” (right panel).
We focus on median splits of the PCs.
In each panel, PC1 (PC2) is represented by the black (gray) solid line.
Whereas, PC3 (PC4) is represented by the black (gray) dashed line.
The most conspicuous finding in the left panel is that people with an above-median level of PC2 have a higher belief (0.20) of the vaccine’s efficacy than people with a below/equal median PC2.
Thus, compliance and being well-informed about the vaccine, seem to be positively correlated with confidence in the efficacy of the vaccine.
The diagram also suggests that a higher PC1 has a similar, though less pronounced, effect (− 0.15 vs. 0.13).
Turning to people’s fear of side effects, the most obvious effect that we observe in the right panel is that a higher PC1 is related with less fear of side effects.
Thus, above-median trusting people who vote are less afraid of sides effects (− 0.15) than those with a below/equal-median value of PC1 (0.18).
In the next step, we make use of parametric-regression analyses to test for statistical significance.
Regression analyses
Table 1 presents OLS regressions on subjects’ confidence in vaccines, focussing again on the two aspects, subjects’ perception of the efficacy of the vaccine (models (1)–(2)) and their fear of possible side effects (models (3)–(4)).
Table 1 OLS regressions on subjects’ trust in the COVID-19 vaccines.
Full size table
Our basic models contain in regressions (1) and (3) the estimated principal components (PCs).
PC1: Trust others & Political participation is our first PC, where trust and voter turnout load high and positive.
PC2:
Compliant & Feels informed is our second PC, with high positive loading for subjects who take great care about social distancing and who feel well-informed about the vaccine.
PC3:
Altruistic & Impatient is our third PC with a high positive loading for subjects who donate much and a negative load of patience.
PC4: Risk tolerant is our fourth PC with a high positive loading for risk-tolerant subjects.
In our regressions, we also control for gender effects with female, a dummy that is positive for women.
Models (2) and (4) add control variables.
Age is subjects’ age in years, current/former student is a dummy, which is positive for students (or those who formerly have completed studies).
German is a dummy that is positive for German participants.
We also add a dummy variable (contact with people at risk) that controls whether our participants commonly meet people endangered by the Coronavirus.
We also control for the impact of participants’ reported level of the experience with the virus (COVID-19 experience).
Moreover, we include a dummy that is positive for those participants who attempt to receive their booster vaccination.
Finally, we include a variable wave to account for possible time dynamics during the pandemic.
The variable is one when the data collection was on December 3, it is two when it was on December 10, and it is three when it was on December 17.
Moreover, we add a location dummy, which is one (zero) when the data were collected at the campus (city center).
All regressions report standard errors in parentheses.
Models (1) and (2) highlight that compliant and informed people believe in the effectiveness of the vaccine.
That is, the coefficient of PC2 is significant and positive, i.e., a one standard deviation (sd) increase leads to a 0.239 sd increase in subjects’ perceived efficacy of the vaccines.
Moreover, PC4 is significantly negative, i.e., risk-averse (or, less risk tolerant) subjects believe that the efficacy of the vaccines is higher.
We also find that PC1 is positive and weakly significant.
However, Model (2) confirms that this effect is not robust when adding controls.
By contrast, the model confirms the effects of PC2 and PC4.
Model (2) reveals a highly significant negative relation with age, i.e., younger people are more convinced about the efficacy of the vaccine.
Finally, we find a highly significant positive relation for people who plan to receive a booster vaccination.
That is, people who frequently received the vaccine believe that it works.
The findings confirm the pattern of Fig.
1.
Result 1
Compliant and risk-averse people who want to get vaccinated and feel well-informed about the vaccine are convinced about its efficacy.
Younger people show higher confidence in the vaccine.
Turning to people’s fear of side effects, we find a strong negative relation for PC1.
That is, trusting people who show a high political participation are less afraid of side effects.
Model (3) shows that this effect is of slightly higher magnitude than the effect of PC2 in Model (1).
It turns out that a one sd increase in PC1 leads to a 0.243 sd decrease in subjects’ fear of side effects.
Model (4) shows that the effect is robust when adding control variables, although the effect becomes weaker in this case.
Model (3) documents that women tend to be more afraid of side effects than men, which is in keeping with the literature on the perception of vaccines20.
However, the effect is not robust in Model (4).
Model (4) shows that younger people and current or former students tend to be less afraid of side effects.
In line with that, we also find that the campus dummy is negatively significant.
Furthermore, results show an intuitive highly significant negative relation of the dummy, which controls whether subjects come to receive a booster vaccination and their fear of side effects.
Put differently, people who plan to receive the booster vaccine show lower levels of fear of side effects.
Again, the results are in line with the pattern of Fig.
1.
Result 2 Trust and political participation of people ready to get vaccinated are associated with less fear of side effects.
In summary, we find that trust is negatively associated with people’s fear of side effects, but its positive association with confidence in vaccine efficacy is not robust to the inclusion of control variables.
Moreover, we find strong support that the feeling of being well-informed is positively associated with people’s confidence in the vaccine’s efficacy, which also holds for risk-averse people.
Thus, our results are in line with Behavioral Predictions 1a–1c.
Motivations to become vaccinated
Next, we report our findings on the determinants of contrasting motivations of receiving the vaccine.
Note that these reasons are mainly related to subjects’ motivations to receive a booster, since 90% of our subjects received a booster.
We compare the determinants of precautionary measures vs. motives of increasing the personal freedom vs. motives of keeping social status.
Before that, we present an overview of the means of participants’ answers regarding the vaccination motives.
This is displayed by Fig. 2.
The black bar presents the mean of the protection & fear index.
Whereas, the gray (white) bar presents the mean score of receiving the vaccine because of reasons of access to restricted areas (peer pressure).
Figure 2 Participants’ stated motivations to become vaccinated.
Full size image
Results show that the scores of the “protection & fear index” and “access to restricted areas” are significantly higher than “peer pressure” (Wilcoxon sign-rank tests, p < 0.001).
Whereas, no significant difference occurs between “protection & fear index” and “access to restricted areas” (Wilcoxon sign-rank test, p = 0.121).
Our main results on the determinants of vaccination motives are summarized in Table 2.
It presents OLS regressions on the three motivations to receive a vaccine, which we have discussed above.
The first motivation is directly related to the Coronavirus in that it focuses on protection issues and subjects’ fear of Omicron.
It is captured by our index protection & fear (models (1)–(2)).
The second motivation analyzed in models (3)–(4) concerns the effect of receiving the vaccine to get access to restricted areas, such as the retail sector or restaurants and bars.
Finally, we consider peer pressure as a motivational factor to maintain one’s social status by getting vaccinated (models (5)–(6)).
In all these models, we correspondingly apply the same independent variables and controls as in Table 1.
Table 2 OLS regressions on subjects’ motivations to become vaccinated.
Full size table
In models (1)–(2)
, we find a strong effect for PC2, which is positive and highly significant.
Thus, compliant subjects who feel well-informed want to receive the vaccine to protect themselves and others.
Another reason is that they fear Omicron.
Precisely, model (2) shows that a one sd increase in PC2 leads to a 0.230 sd increase in subjects’ motivation to receive the vaccine for reasons of protection and fear.
Model (1) indicates a significantly positive effect of PC1.
However, this effect disappears in Model (2), when applying control variables.
Model (2) reveals a significantly negative effect of risk tolerance, i.e., risk-averse people are motivated to protect others.
Precisely, a one sd increase in risk tolerance leads to a 0.160 sd decrease in subjects’ motivation to receive the vaccine for reasons of protection & fear.
Finally, Model (2) shows a significantly positive relation between altruistic people and the motive to get vaccinated for protecting others.
Taken together, we find support for Behavioral Prediction 2a.
Moreover, models (1)–(2) highlight a gender effect.
That is, the coefficient of female is positive and highly significant.
Thus, it is particularly the women who are afraid of Omicron and who receive the vaccine for reasons of protection.
Finally, we find that the dummy controlling for the booster vaccination is positive and highly significant.
Thus, people, who want to receive a booster vaccine, do this particularly for reasons of protection and fear of Omicron.
A closer look at disaggregated analyses of the components of the index reveals that the gender effect is particularly driven by women’s pronounced motivation to protect others (see Table S1 in the Supplementary Information).
In addition, we find that women are more afraid of Omicron than men.
Result 3a Compliant and risk-averse people who feel well-informed and are ready to get the vaccine want it for reasons of protection and fear.
It is particularly the women, who want the vaccination for protective issues.
A main finding in models (3)–(4) is that the coefficient of PC3 is significantly negative.
Pearson’s correlation coefficients show that this relation is entirely driven by altruism (Pearson’s correlation coefficients, altruism: \(\rho\)
= − 0.171, p = 0.027; patience: \(\rho\) = − 0.021, p = 0.793).
Thus, less altruistic people want the vaccine for motives of getting access to restricted areas.
The effect is of the same size as the effect of PC2 in model (2).
That is, a one sd increase in PC3 leads to a 0.227 sd decrease in the access motivation.
Moreover, we find a weakly significant effect for PC4.
Thus, it is the risk tolerant people who tend to be motivated by reasons of getting access to restricted areas.
The results find support for Behavioral Prediction 2b.
Moreover, model (4) reveals that a motivation to become vaccinated because of reasons to get access is more likely when people have no contact to people at risk.
Finally, we find a significantly negative effect of COVID-19 experience.
Thus, people who had only minor personal experience with COVID-19 want to get the vaccine for motives of personal freedom.
Result 3b Less altruistic and more risk tolerant people that want to get vaccinated want the vaccine for reasons of getting access to restricted areas.
People that have contact to people at risk and people who had strong personal experiences with COVID-19 are not motivated by this reason.
Models (5)–(6) highlight significantly positive coefficients of PC4: Risk tolerant.
The effect becomes less pronounced, though, when adding controls.
Thus, peer-pressure motives matter for risk-tolerant people.
In model (6), we find that a one sd of PC4 leads to a 0.150 sd increase in peer-pressure motives.
The finding is in line with Behavioral Prediction 2c.
Moreover, model (6) shows that current or former students are less motivated by peer pressure.
Result 3c
Peer-pressure motives matter for risk tolerant subjects, whereas they are less important for current or former students.
Gov. Jim Justice appears at the announcement of state support for Marshall University's baseball stadium.
Senators are trailing the Justice administration’s transfer of the remaining $28 million in federal covid relief dollars to a fund controlled by the Governor’s Office, which then put millions of dollars from that transfer toward construction of Marshall University’s new baseball field.
“Isn’t that money laundering?” asked Senator Randy Smith, R-Tucker.
No, responded Berkeley Bentley, general counsel for the Governor’s Office.
Bentley was testifying before the Senate Finance Committee, which wanted to know more about the transfer’s reasoning and validity.
He told senators that the state faced a deadline to spend the remaining $28 million from federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act funds.
The state incurred that amount in costs for pandemic-related expenses for corrections and homeland security, he said.
Then the state reimbursed its own expenses by using the federal covid money.
Facing the deadline, Bentley told senators, the administration found it simplest to transfer the reimbursed money into the Governor’s Office Gifts, Grants and Donations Fund.
“Once allocated, those CARES-eligible expenses — the $28.3 million — became state dollars, for lack of a better word,” Bentley said.
“We spent the CARES money on CARES-eligible purposes, reimbursing the state.
That becomes subject to state law, not the federal CARES requirements.”
Among that fund’s distributions following the transfer to the governor’s fund was $10 million to Marshall University to support construction of a new baseball stadium.
Senators seemed to think that money trail had a dogleg.
Senate Finance Chairman Eric Tarr repeatedly asked if the state’s expenses were for corrections then why didn’t the reimbursement go to corrections.
“You’re telling me that you can reimburse, related to any expense the state would have with covid, that the governor can move that money anywhere it wants and say it’s covid-related?” asked Tarr, R-Putnam.
Noting that corrections has staffing shortages that have resulted in a separate, ongoing state of emergency, Tarr went farther.
“Then the governor’s staff claimed that covid-related expenses came from corrections for those monies that we appropriated to them in that state of emergency, and when you transferred the last $28 million — which doesn’t come close to covering any of those corrections expenses, the governor decides to put it into a discretionary account and start putting into astroturf on baseball fields,” Tarr said.
“I want to ask you what part of that is appropriate.”
Bentley replied, “When the state reimburses itself, there is no direction under federal or state law that directs where that money goes.”
Tarr followed up.
“You didn’t reimburse those expenses that came from corrections.
You reimbursed it to the governor’s discretionary account.
And that money — some of it’s still sitting there, much of it’s not — went to a baseball field and other expenses.
Is that accurate?”
Bentley: “So far, those are the transfers that I’m aware of out of the fund after the transfer was made.”
Tarr: “There was no transfer to corrections whatsoever out of that money?”
Bentley: “There has been no transfer to corrections for that.”
The Senate Finance Committee also got testimony from state Auditor J.B. McCuskey, whose office had questioned the transfer to the governor’s discretionary fund.
“Was that a usual request that you would have seen coming from the executive?”
Tarr asked.
“No,” McCuskey said.
The auditor later provided more context.
“We see our role in this process as ensuring that all of these things are done legally and properly, but I think more importantly is ensuring there’s a record of what happened so that people in rooms like this can know what happened later.
So we asked for a legal and accounting opinion.”
The Governor’s Office referenced opinions by outside counsel as well as a nationally-known accounting firm.
McCuskey noted that at the time of the transfer to the governor’s discretionary fund, the auditor’s staff would have had no way of knowing the final transfer to the baseball project was ahead.
McCuskey suggested a more logical transfer might have been to accounts under the authority of corrections.
Later in the hearing, senators asked Homeland Security Secretary Jeff Sandy about the funding transfer.
Sandy had described receiving about $52 million from CARES, including $41 million for medical expenses.
Tarr wanted to know how corrections could have gotten that money back while the $28 million went elsewhere.
“How is the additional $28 million related to other expenses?”
Sandy didn’t know right off hand.
“I cannot answer that, sir,” Sandy replied.
“I can give you that answer, but I cannot today.”
Well into the day’s testimony, Senator Smith was still trying to make it all make sense.
“I’m trying to wrap my head around how a baseball field would fall under covid funds,” he said.
“How, legally, could we use covid money for a baseball facility?”
Overview
This mid-year report provides a consolidated update on WHO’s response to the COVID‐19 pandemic between January and July 2022, against the objectives laid out in the Strategic Preparedness and Response Plans (SPRP) for 2021 and 2022.
With the aim of ending the acute phase of the pandemic by the end of the year, WHO, in collaboration with partners, has supported countries to further strengthen their surveillance systems; ensure more equitable access to tests, treatments, and essential supplies worldwide; make health systems more resilient; and reduce exposure to the disease by empowering and enabling communities.
The report highlights the role of WHO at the global, regional, and local levels, and across the key elements of an effective emergency response – from implementation and operational support, to developing evidence and research, and providing strong coordination and planning.
By working with partners, including multi-agency and multi-partner operational platforms, regional and national public health and scientific institutes, governments, communities, donors, UN organizations and NGOs and the private sector, WHO helped bring the world together to provide direct technical and operational support to countries implementing their national COVID-19 response plans.
When the COVID-19 vaccines became available in early 2021, many experienced side effects—especially after people had their second dose.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) even addressed this, noting at the time that side effects from the second dose can be more intense than the ones people experienced after their first shot.
Those side effects, the CDC said, are normal signs that your body is building protection.
After two doses, the booster shot became available in October 2021.
The CDC also recommended additional doses for immunocompromised individuals, based on their age group and the type of vaccine they received.
But additional doses and booster shots can come with side effects and many wonder—are they worse or better than the first or second vaccine dose?
Here's what you need to know about any symptoms you might feel after a booster or additional shot of a COVID-19 vaccine, according to experts.
Getty Images
What Do We Need To Know About COVID-19 Booster Shots?
The CDC started recommending booster shots as early as September 2021, since protection against the virus and the ability to prevent infection from different variants can decrease over time.
As of February 2022, everyone ages 18 and older is able to get a COVID-19 booster, and either the Pfizer or Moderna booster is fine, but the CDC recommends that youth ages 12-17 only get the Pfizer booster.
You should wait 5 months after being fully vaccinated to get the booster (2 months if you received the Johnson & Johnson Janssen vaccine).
Additional doses of the Moderna mRNA COVID-19 vaccine for individuals who are moderately to severely immunocompromised are different from booster doses, per the CDC: "Sometimes people who are moderately to severely immunocompromised do not build enough (or any) protection when they first get a vaccination," the agency said.
That additional dose can then help immunocompromised people have a better chance of mounting some sort of immune response to the virus.
A "booster dose," on the other hand, is a dose given to someone who was able to build protection after their initial vaccination, but then that protection decreased over time (aka, "waning immunity").
The CDC reiterates additional doses, as well as booster shots, for immunocompromised individuals should be administered based on your age group and the type of vaccine you received.
What Side Effects Can You Expect After an Additional or Booster Dose of the COVID-19 Vaccine?
"Whether you're getting an additional dose of a COVID-19 vaccine due to your immunocompromised status, or if you're receiving a booster shot, you can probably expect to have a similar (or possibly better) response to how you reacted after having the two-dose series of the vaccine," William Schaffner, MD, an infectious disease specialist and professor at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, told Health.
"There is no tendency to have more side effects with a third dose than either the first or the second," said Dr. Schaffner.
"What's clear is that it should not be worse.
"
Infectious disease expert Amesh A. Adalja, MD, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, agreed: "The side effects are probably going to be very similar to the second dose for most people," Dr. Adalja told Health.
And, if you didn't feel so hot after your second dose, keep this in mind: Your third dose likely won't be as bad.
"You may have less of a reaction because there is a lot of space between the second and third doses [versus] first and second doses," Dr. Adalja said.
"Your immune system may be dampened somewhat.
"
In study findings released on September 28, 2021, the CDC reports that reactions reported after a third dose of the mRNA vaccine were "similar" to those of the two-dose series.
The most common side effects have been pain at the injection site, fatigue, and headache.
Most of these side effects were "mild to moderate" and happened a day after the booster.
Pfizer offered some detail in its application for an emergency use authorization (EUA) for a third dose, too.
That application said that side effects after the third dose were similar to those after a second dose of the vaccine, including:
Redness and swelling around the injection site
Tiredness
Headache
Muscle and joint pain
Chills
Pfizer also said in a 2021 press release about its EUA application for a booster dose that side effects were "similar to or better than" people had after their second dose of the vaccine.
What Can You Expect After an Additional or Booster Dose?
There's been a lot of expert advice about planning to take it easy after your second dose of the COVID-19 vaccine, and doctors say it's probably not a terrible idea for your third dose, just to be safe.
"It's sensible to take it easy afterward," Dr. Schaffner said.
"Don't plan to do anything strenuous the day after your shot.
"
Dr. Adalja said you can expect to have a similar reaction to your second dose of the mRNA vaccine.
"However rough it was, use it as your baseline to see if you need to take any special precautions," said Dr. Adalja.
The information in this story is accurate as of press time.
However, as the situation surrounding COVID-19 continues to evolve, it's possible that some data have changed since publication.
While Health is trying to keep our stories as up-to-date as possible, we also encourage readers to stay informed on news and recommendations for their own communities by using the CDC, WHO, and their local public health department as resources.
You don’t have to be in Florida very long before you hear someone complain theatrically about snowbirds—the refugees from the northern winter who flock to Orlando and Miami.
The coronavirus pandemic created new creatures: Call them the maskbirds, flying south to escape the stricter COVID-19 policies of other parts of the country.
Net migration to Florida sharply increased from 2020 to 2021, one study found.
Search through the newspapers, and you’ll see story after story about people abandoning New York for Florida’s sunshine, lower taxes, and mask-free life.
That influx alone doesn’t account for Ron DeSantis’s nearly 20-point victory in the gubernatorial race, which had many causes.
But it does help explain it.
The first-term Republican’s defiance of conventional public-health wisdom in the initial year of the pandemic gave him a national platform while also flattering the self-image of his current constituents—or at least a large number of them—as brave freedom lovers.
(The data bear this out: His approval ratings dipped early in the pandemic before recovering.)
DeSantis takes every chance to hammer home the idea of Florida as the “nation’s citadel of freedom,” as he put it in a campaign stump speech in Melbourne last week.
That allows him to champion his own state against a range of opponents defined by geography and referenced by name: crime-ridden blue cities such as San Francisco, the piously pro-immigration liberals of Martha’s Vineyard, the “elites” in Washington, D.C.
David Frum: Trump lost the midterms.
DeSantis won.
In the governor’s narrative of the coronavirus, the people of Florida did not cower at home or tentatively venture outside in masks, nor did they labor under vaccine mandates as new variants spread across the country.
No, they were free.
Free to support their family.
Free to attend school.
Free to run a business.
Free from the constraints of fogged glasses and not being able to unlock their iPhone.
To that, a liberal might add: free to get sick or even die from a respiratory disease for which safe, effective vaccines are available.
Which is exactly the point.
DeSantis’s COVID policies reassured members of his political base that they were in control: They understood the risks and took them anyway.
And although Florida had a relatively high COVID death toll, the welter of confounding factors (weather, demographics, wealth) denied liberals the smackdown they craved.
Added to that, DeSantis’s instincts were not as extreme as his opponents suggest—or, knowing how it plays with his base, as he likes to claim.
Florida reopened its schools in August 2020—earlier than many major blue-state districts but after many European countries.
Throughout the pandemic, Florida’s work-from-home and masking policies would not have made it an outlier in European terms.
Sometimes, liberals have to accept that the polarization of U.S. politics goes two ways, and that their favored policies look extreme to outsiders: “No other high-income country in the world relied to such a great extent on remote instruction,” Meira Levinson and Daniel Markovits wrote in The Atlantic earlier this year.
DeSantis’s COVID gamble also played into other politically useful narratives.
His message was a macho one of risk-taking and courage, which tapped into the existing Republican advantage among male voters.
One of the warm-up clips at the Melbourne rally was from Tucker Carlson’s Fox News show, in which Carlson mocked DeSantis’s Democratic opponent, Charlie Crist, for wearing a mask while exercising in a hotel gym.
On the big screen, Carlson said, “We reached out to Charlie Crist’s office and asked, ‘What exactly were you doing with a mask on alone in the gym, you freak?’”
To that machismo, DeSantis added a dash of social conservatism, even puritanism, telling the crowd, “Heck, if we were just here four years ago and someone had told you we would have states in this country lock kids out of school for a year—you’d have them close churches, but they left the liquor stores and the strip clubs open—you would have said that would not have been possible in the United States of America.”
He solicited boos with a mention of the government infectious-disease expert Anthony Fauci, showing how to draw on the well of conspiracist energy created by COVID without diving into it.
Soon after in his Melbourne speech, he did something even more interesting without any fanfare.
He slipped in an attack on his own party for its cowardly adherence to the scientific consensus: “Make no mistake, at the time, I was getting hammered, hit by the media every day, 24/7; the left’s attacking me,” he said.
“We even had some weak Republicans attacking me.”
(More boos.)
Derek Thompson:
The curious case of Florida’s pandemic response
No names were given, but he was subtly laundering an idea that might prove useful in a GOP primary campaign in 2024.
Who in the Republican Party got vaccinated, reluctantly wore a mask, and walked back his endorsement of untested treatments for the coronavirus?
Trump—who briefly played the role of “responsible world leader” for a few short months of the pandemic.
To whom did the hated Fauci report?
Also Trump.
An ambitious governor might ask, “Hey, weren’t you the guy who stood next to Anthony Fauci all those months while I was keeping Florida’s schools and businesses open?”
If DeSantis was indeed testing such a line of attack, it lacked the immediacy of Trump’s new nickname for him, aired at a rally a day later: “Ron DeSanctimonious.”
That was Trump all over: gleeful, grubby, trollish.
But although the phrase shimmered in the air—and captivated Twitter—Trump didn’t repeat it again at later events and even grudgingly semi-endorsed the governor.
For once, a Trump target seemed unbruised by an encounter with the great bully.
Until now, no one else in the Republican Party has found a way to defuse the mockery with which the former president treats all authority not his own.
But winning Florida by a greater margin than Trump did in either 2016 or 2020 speaks for itself.
When liberals look at DeSantis, they see a culture warrior with authoritarian tendencies: He has pushed back on the Biden White House’s approach to LGBTQ rights—one man at his rally wore a T-shirt that read I IDENTIFY AS NON-BIDENARY—and makes a regular show of disdaining news media.
But as Americans have tired of pandemic precautions, and as regrets about long school closures have surfaced even among Democrats, DeSantis has been able to attract swing voters by positioning himself as a champion of both cultural and economic freedom.
The maskbirds are too few in number to have given DeSantis his victory.
But they influenced the election all the same—by becoming a symbol of Florida as an ideal.
Augusta University President Brooks A. Keel, PhD, has tested positive for COVID-19, the university announced today.
His symptoms, which began on Saturday, Aug. 13, are mild and include those commonly seen with the flu.
In accordance with CDC guidelines, Keel is isolating at home for the next several days, where he will be able to carry out all of his duties except attending several scheduled in-person events this week.
Keel, who is vaccinated and boosted, will return to campus as soon as he has completed the isolation and return-to-work protocols defined by the CDC.
CNN —
President Joe Biden said he believes the Covid-19 pandemic is “over” in an appearance on CBS’ “60 Minutes,” but acknowledged the US still has a “problem” with the virus that has killed more than 1 million Americans.
“The pandemic is over.
We still have a problem with Covid.
We’re still doing a lot of work on it.
It’s – but the pandemic is over,” Biden said.
The US government still designates Covid-19 a Public Health Emergency and the World Health Organization says it remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.
But the President’s comments follow other hopeful comments from global health leaders.
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director-general of the World Health Organization, said in a news briefing last week that the end of the Covid-19 pandemic was “in sight,” and that the world has never been in a better position to end the Covid-19 pandemic.
“Last week, the number of weekly reported deaths from Covid-19 was the lowest since March 2020,” Ghebreyesus said.
“We have never been in a better position to end the pandemic.
We’re not there yet, but the end is in sight.”
Last month, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention adjusted its Covid-19 guidance to urge the nation away from measures such as quarantines and social distancing and instead focus on reducing severe disease from Covid-19.
But the agency says some people, including those who are older, immunocompromised, have certain disabilities or underlying health conditions, are at higher risk for serious illness, and may need to take more precautions.
There were about 65,000 new Covid-19 cases reported each day over the past two weeks, data from Johns Hopkins University shows, and reported cases are dropping in almost every state.
Across the United States, about 400 people are dying every day from Covid-19.
Although official case counts are far from representative of true levels of transmission, forecasts published by the CDC say that new hospitalizations and deaths will hold steady for the next month.
For people hospitalized for Covid-19, the risk of dying fell to the lowest it’s ever been during the Omicron wave, according to a study published last week by the CDC.
The researchers suggest that there were several contributing factors to the improved mortality risk: high levels of immunity, both from vaccination and previous infection, advances in treatments and properties of the Omicron subvariants that made them less likely to cause disease.
Biden on 2024
The President told “60 Minutes” in the interview aired Sunday he had not made a “firm decision” on whether he would run for reelection in 2024 but said he intended to run.
“Look, my intention, as I said to begin with, is that I would run again.
But it’s just an intention.
But is it a firm decision that I run again?
That remains to be seen,” Biden said.
The President said: “I’m a great respecter of fate.
And so, what I’m doing is I’m doing my job.
I’m gonna do that job.
And within the time frame that makes sense after this next election cycle here, going into next year, make a judgment on what to do.”
The President and top administration officials have maintained the President intends to run again in 2024, but Biden told ABC in December that it would depend on whether he was in good health.
‘I don’t want to get myself in the middle’
Biden told CBS he had not been briefed on the contents of the documents that were removed from former President Donald Trump’s Mar-a-Lago residence by the FBI in August, and said he did not want to interfere with any potential actions by the Department of Justice.
“I have not asked for the specifics of those documents because I don’t want to get myself in the middle of whether or not the Justice Department should move or not move on certain actions they could take.
I – I agreed I would not tell them what to do and not, in fact, engage in telling them how to prosecute or not,” Biden said.
The Justice Department removed 11 sets of classified documents from Mar-a-Lago while executing a search warrant for possible violations of the Espionage Act and other crimes, according to unsealed court documents.
Asked what his reaction was when he saw the photograph taken by the FBI that showed an array of documents found on Trump’s property, Biden said: “How that could possibly happen?
How one – anyone could be that irresponsible?”
“And I thought what data was in there that may compromise sources and methods?
By that I mean names of people who helped or, et cetera.
And it just, totally irresponsible,” Biden said.
Biden said no one has briefed him on whether important national security secrets were revealed by the storage of those documents at the former President’s residence.
“I have not personally spoken to anyone on that – in that regard.
I’m sure my administration is aware of all of that, and so is the National Security Council.
But I have not,” Biden said.
The President also told CBS that US military personnel would defend Taiwan in the event of a Chinese invasion.
The President was asked whether “US forces, US men and women would defend Taiwan in the event of a Chinese invasion,” a prospect US officials privately fear is becoming more likely.
“Yes,” Biden responded.
It’s not the first time Biden has gone beyond the US approach of “strategic ambiguity” when it comes to Taiwan.
During a visit to Tokyo in May, Biden said the US would intervene militarily if China attempts to take Taiwan by force.
The White House has consistently said after Biden’s comments that US policy hadn’t changed, and “60 Minutes” reported receiving a similar response to Biden’s answers in their interview.
Under the “One China” policy, the US acknowledges China’s position that Taiwan is part of China, but has never officially recognized Beijing’s claim to the self-governing island of 23 million.
Biden repeated his commitment to those policies in the “60 Minutes” interview.
This story has been updated with additional information.
Public health experts and medical providers are warning that respiratory viruses pose a severe risk to children this fall, and they are emphasizing the importance of vaccines in keeping kids safe.
Since July, there has been a surge in coronavirus cases among children nationwide, and the number of severe cases has continued to rise steadily, according to surveillance data collected by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The agency also reports that respiratory syncytial virus cases are increasing in certain parts of the United States, with an earlier onset than in previous years.
According to experts, cases of both viruses will continue to rise.
Patients
The study subjects were 30 patients (22 men and 8 women, median age 54; range: 25–69 years) diagnosed clinically with COVID-19 for the first time after visiting the National Center for Global Health and Medicine (NCGM), Tokyo, Japan, between June 2020 and March 2021.
Twenty five of the 30 (83.3%)
patients developed co-existing severe pneumonia, and of these, 5 required positive pressure ventilation, and 3 of the latter also required treatment with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
Plasma test samples were obtained between 33 and 316 days (median 96 days) after the onset of clinical features of COVID-19 infection.
The Human Ethics Committee of the NCGM approved the study (#NCGM-G-003472–02) and each patient provided a written informed consent.
The study also conformed to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Measurement of anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody titers
Samples from each participant were analyzed for the levels of two anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies (anti-S-IgG and anti-N-IgG) using the chemiluminescence enzyme immunoassay (CLEIA) platforms (HISCL) purchased from Sysmex Co. (Kobe, Japan) as reported previously14.
Cells, viruses, antibodies and isolation of IgG fractions from COVID‑19‑convalescent patients
Vero-E6TMPRSS2 cells23 and HeLahACE2-TMPRSS2 cells24 were obtained from Japanese Collection of Research Bioresources (JCRB)
Cell Bank (Osaka, Japan).
Each cell type was maintained in D-MEM supplemented with 10% FCS, 100 μg/ml of penicillin, 100 μg/ml of streptomycin, and 1 mg/mL of G418.
PANGO lineage B, wild type (WT) Wuhan strain
[SARS-CoV-2 NCGM-05-2N (SARS-CoV-205-2N)] and B.1.1.529 (omicron) variants
[hCoV-19/Japan/IC-2279/2021 SARS-CoV-2 NCGM-929-1N (SARS-CoV-2929-1N)] were isolated from nasopharyngeal swabs of a patient with COVID-19, who was admitted to the NCGM7,13,16,17.
Seven clinically isolated SARS-CoV-2 mutant strains were used in the present study: two B.1.1.7 (alpha) variants [hCoV-19/Japan/QHN001/2020 (SARS-CoV-2QHN001, GISAID accession ID; EPI_ISL_804007) and hCoV-19/Japan/QK002/2020 (SARS-CoV-2QK002, GISAID Accession ID; EPI_ISL_768526)] and a B.1.351 (beta) variant
[hCoV-19/Japan/TY8-612-P0/2021 (SARS-CoV-2TY8-612, GISAID accession ID; EPI_ISL_1123289)] and a P.1 (gamma) variant [hCoV-19/Japan/TY7-501/2021 (SARS-CoV-2TY7-501, GISAID Accession ID; EPI_ISL_833366)] were obtained from the National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo.
The B.1.617.2 (delta) variant [hCoV-19/Japan/TKYK01734/2021 (SARS-CoV-21734, GISAID Accession ID; EPI_ISL_2080609)], B.1.617.1 (kappa) variant
[TKYTK5356_2021 (SARS-CoV-25356, DDBJ Accession ID; LC633761)] and R.1 variant [hCoV-19/Japan/TKY76107/2021 (SARS-CoV-276107, GISAID Accession ID; EPI_ISL_1041946)] were provided by Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Public Health, Tokyo.
Each variant was confirmed to contain each variant of concern-specific amino acid substitutions before the assays conducted in the present study (vide infra).
The mAb1414, mAb2414 and mAb40591, anti-SARS-CoV-2 monoclonal antibodies, were purchased from Active Motif (Carlsbad, CA) and Sino Biological (Beijing, China), respectively.
The pAbA19215, anti-SARS-CoV-2 polyclonal antibody was purchased from ABclonal (Woburn, MA).
Plasma or serum samples were collected from patients, and IgG fractions were purified using a spin column-based antibody purification kit (Cosmo Bio, Tokyo) according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer.
Briefly, serum or plasma was collected, heat-inactivated for 30 min at 56 °C, and spin columns were centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 5 min.
The IgG fractions in the supernatants were eluted and collected.
Antiviral assays
The neutralizing activities of IgG fractions from COVID‑19‑convalescent plasma were determined by quantifying the IgG antibody suppression of the cytopathic effect (CPE) of each SARS-CoV-2 strain in VeroE6TMPRSS2 cells and HeLahACE2-TMPRSS2 cells, using the procedures described previously7,13,16,17.
Briefly, each of the purified IgG fraction was two-fold serially diluted in the culture medium.
The diluted IgG fractions were incubated with 100 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID 50 ) of the viruses at 37 °C for 20 min (final IgG dilution range: 6.3–100 µg/ml), after which the IgG-virus mixtures were inoculated into VeroE6TMPRSS2 cells and/or HeLahACE2-TMPRSS2 cells (1.0 × 104/well) in 96-well plates.
The SARS-CoV-2 strains used in this assay were as follows: wild type strain, SARS-CoV-205-2N (PANGO lineage B), two alpha variants (SARS-CoV-2QHN001 and SARS-CoV-2QK002), beta variant SARS-CoV-2TY8-612, gamma variant SARS-CoV-2TY7-501, delta variant SARS-CoV-21734, kappa variant SARS-CoV-25356, omicron variant SARS-CoV-2929-1N and R.1 variant SARS-CoV-276107.
After 3-day culture of the cells, the level of cytopathic effect (CPE) observed in SARS-CoV-2-exposed cells was determined using the WST-8 assay, employing Cell Counting Kit-8 (Dojindo, Kumamoto, Japan).
The IgG antibody dilution that yielded 50% inhibition of CPE was defined as the 50% Inhibition Concentration (IC 50 ).
Each of the purified IgG fractions was tested in duplicate.
Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD).
Differences between groups were analyzed for statistical significance using Kruskal–Wallis test.
When the latter test was significant, post-hoc Dunn’s multiple comparisons test was applied.
Correlations between two assays were analyzed for statistical significance using nonparametric Spearman test.
A p value < 0.05 denoted the presence of statistically significant difference.
All statistical analyses were performed using the GraphPad Prism software version 8 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA).
Institutional review board statement
The Ethics Committee at the NCGM approved the present study (#NCGM-G-003472-02).
Each patient provided written informed consent.
The study also conformed to the Declaration of Helsinki principles.
Wray publicly comments on the FBI's position on COVID's origins, adding political fire
Enlarge this image toggle caption Carolyn Kaster/AP Carolyn Kaster/AP
FBI Director Christopher Wray has told Fox News that the bureau's ongoing investigation into the origins of COVID-19 suggests the virus was unleashed after a potential lab incident in Wuhan, China.
The FBI's assessment is not the consensus among intelligence and scientific communities.
"The FBI has for quite some time now assessed that the origins of the pandemic are most likely a potential lab incident in Wuhan," Wray said, adding later in the interview that the FBI's work on the matter continues.
"I will just make the observation that the Chinese government seems to me has been doing its best to try to thwart and obfuscate the work here ...
and that's unfortunate for everybody.
"
The assessment is not new.
The bureau previously concluded with moderate confidence that COVID first emerged accidentally from the Wuhan Institute of Virology, which worked on coronaviruses.
And the FBI's assessment is far from universal.
Four other U.S. intelligence agencies as well as the National Intelligence Council say, with low confidence, that COVID emerged through natural transmission.
Nevertheless, Wray's remarks are the first in public by a senior law enforcement official following the Energy Department's classified report, published by the Wall Street Journal on Sunday, saying the pandemic was likely caused by a lab leak in China.
That assessment was reportedly "low confidence.
"
Concerns about the origins of COVID come as tensions rise between the U.S. and China
Eight U.S. government agencies are investigating the source of COVID-19, and they remain very divided on the issue.
None of them is certain about the cause.
Four lean toward natural causes.
Two haven't taken a position.
Meanwhile, the evidence produced by the greater scientific community points overwhelmingly to a natural cause, via exposure to an infected animal.
Politics Congress puts a spotlight on threats it believes China's government is posing Congress puts a spotlight on threats it believes China's government is posing Listen · 3:35 3:35
The resurrection of the debate over COVID's origins comes at a fraught time for Sino-U.S. relations.
The two sides have clashed over China's use of alleged spy balloons over the U.S.; its policy toward Russia and Ukraine; its belligerence toward Taiwan, which Beijing regards as a renegade province; and the apparent dangers of TikTok.
On Tuesday, in a rare show of bipartisanship, Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill focused on threats they believe are posed by the Chinese government in a series of hearings culminating with one held by the newly created House Select Committee on strategic competition between the U.S. and the Chinese Communist Party.
The pandemic is not over, and things are still changing.
One thing that remains the same is the need for accessible information about staying safe and adapting to the changes that COVID-19 has brought!
That’s why we have released videos and fact sheets about new parts of our lives with COVID-19, like Long Covid, vaccine cards, and vaccine mandates.
These resources answers questions like:
What is Long Covid?
What should I do if I think I have Long Covid?
How can I help someone with Long Covid?
What is a vaccine mandate?
How do I get my vaccine card?
Why is a vaccine card important?
And more!
“What you need to know about Long Covid” is available as a fact sheet in plain language and Easy Read.
What you need to know about Long Covid (Easy Read)
Lo que necesitas saber sobre la Covid Persistente (Easy Read)
What you need to know about Long Covid (Plain Language)
Lo que necesitas saber sobre la Covid Persistente (Plain Language)
There is also a video!
In English:
In Spanish:
“What you need to know about the COVID-19 vaccine: Vaccine cards and vaccine mandates” is available as a fact sheet in plain language and Easy Read.
What you need to know about the COVID-19 vaccine: Vaccine cards and vaccine mandates (Easy Read)
Lo que necesitas saber sobre la vacuna contra la COVID-19: Tarjetas de vacunación y mandatos de vacunación(Easy Read)
What you need to know about the COVID-19 vaccine: Vaccine cards and vaccine mandates (Plain Language)
Lo que necesitas saber sobre la vacuna contra la COVID-19: Tarjetas de vacunación y mandatos de vacunación (Plain Language)
There is also a video!
In English:
In Spanish:
You can find all of our accessible COVID-19 materials here.
We hope that by learning more about changing COVID-19 guidance and sharing these resources, everyone can do their part to keep each other and our community safe.
The COVID-19 At-Home Test that tens of millions of Americans received via the U.S. government is now available over-the-counter nationwide under the new Pilot name and brand.
Accurate, fast and easy to use, the Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test is the first over-the-counter test launched by Roche Diagnostics in the U.S.
Following Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidance for at-home testing and appropriate next steps can help reduce the spread of COVID-19.
INDIANAPOLIS, Nov. 10, 2022 /PRNewswire/ -- Roche (SIX: RO, ROG; OTCQX: RHHBY) announced a new name and brand for the COVID-19 At-Home Test – Pilot® COVID-19 At-Home Test, which debuts this week nationwide.
The Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test distributed by Roche Diagnostics is available at CVS, Amazon and in the Optum Store.
Post this The COVID-19 At-Home Test distributed by Roche, which tens of millions of Americans received via the U.S. government, Amazon and the Optum Store, is available under a new name and brand - Pilot® COVID-19 At-Home Test.
The Pilot-branded test is now available over-the-counter at CVS Pharmacy, in addition to Amazon and the Optum Store.
The Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test, the first over-the-counter test distributed in the U.S. by Roche Diagnostics, received emergency use authorization (EUA) from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on December 24, 2021¹, and is manufactured by
SD Biosensor Inc.
The test has been distributed to tens of millions of Americans via the U.S. government's efforts to expand access to testing earlier this year.
It uses a simple anterior nasal swab sample that can be conveniently self-collected and self-tested by individuals ages 14 years and older, and by an adult for children ages 2 to 13 years old.² The Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test is able to produce accurate, reliable and quick results in as few as 20 minutes for SARS-CoV-2.
"Great progress has been made to make COVID-19 testing easy and universal," said Matt Sause, president and CEO of Roche Diagnostics North America.
"We are excited that the Pilot test offers convenience and broad accessibility for frequent testing needs, whether for a known exposure or safety for group settings.
"
With a relative sensitivity of 93.2% and a relative specificity of 100%3, the Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test can help you determine your next step, such as self-isolation for COVID-19, seeking further testing, and pursuing advice from a healthcare professional about treatment options, or ending isolation with two confirmed negative results.
Taking an at-home COVID-19 test is recommended by the CDC when you: have any COVID-19 symptoms; were exposed to someone with COVID-19; or are going to an indoor event or gathering.
If you test negative, consider repeating the test 48 hours later.
Receiving multiple negative test results increases the confidence that you are not infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
If you have symptoms, although serial testing may be useful, seeing a healthcare provider should be considered because multiple viruses including the flu are currently circulating.
The Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test is available at CVS Pharmacy and cvs.com , Amazon and in the Optum Store .
In March 2020, Roche became the first company to launch a commercial COVID-19 PCR test running on high-throughput laboratory instruments.
The company has developed more than 20 COVID-19 tests and solutions globally, and sold more than 1.8 billion COVID-19 tests worldwide since the beginning of the pandemic.
Roche offers high-quality solutions for every setting, from large reference laboratories to at-home testing.
For more information about the Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test, visit go.roche.com/COVID-Home-Test .
About Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test
The Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test is a rapid chromatographic immunoassay for the qualitative detection of the nucleocapsid protein of SARS-CoV-2 present in anterior nasal swab samples.
In a prospective clinical study, the Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test showed a relative sensitivity of 93.2% (95% CI: 81.8 to 97.7 %) and a relative specificity of 100% (95% CI: 96.7 to 100%).
Overall the studies included 168 symptomatic individuals (158 evaluable samples).²
This test is intended for*: 1) non-prescription home use (OTC) within the first 6 days of symptom onset, and 2) non-prescription home use, with or without symptoms or other epidemiological reasons to suspect COVID-19, when tested twice over three days with at least 24 hours (and no more than 48 hours) between tests.
*Individuals ages 14 years or older can sample and test themselves.
Children ages 2 to 13 must be sampled and tested by an adult.
Variants, including omicron BA.1, BA.2 , BA.4 & BA.5, have been analyzed by SD Biosensor, and there is no expected impact on the performance of the test.4
About SD Biosensor
SD Biosensor, Inc., with its slogan "Beginning of all things that protect lives," is a global in-vitro diagnostic company that contributes to improving everyone's quality of life by diagnosing diseases quickly and accurately.
SD Biosensor is a Total Solution Provider in the IVD industry that develops and researches innovative diagnostic platforms.
In 2020, SD Biosensor, Inc. began supplying numerous WHO prequalified for global public health diagnostic products, especially those for malaria, HIV and HCV.
Based on our R&D know-how, Mass Production Capacity, and Global Sales Network, SD Biosensor, Inc. will continue to grow as a global biotech company by creating new value through accumulating data using AI as well as in the areas of diagnosis, products, and services.
For further information, please see our official website at www.sdbiosensor.com .
About Roche
Founded in 1896 in Basel, Switzerland, as one of the first industrial manufacturers of branded medicines, Roche has grown into the world's largest biotechnology company and the global leader in in-vitro diagnostics.
The company pursues scientific excellence to discover and develop medicines and diagnostics for improving and saving the lives of people around the world.
We are a pioneer in personalized healthcare and want to further transform how healthcare is delivered to have an even greater impact.
To provide the best care for each person we partner with many stakeholders and combine our strengths in Diagnostics and Pharma with data insights from the clinical practice.
In recognizing our endeavor to pursue a long-term perspective in all we do, Roche has been named one of the most sustainable companies in the pharmaceuticals industry by the Dow Jones Sustainability Indices for the thirteenth consecutive year.
This distinction also reflects our efforts to improve access to healthcare together with local partners in every country we work.
Genentech, in the United States, is a wholly owned member of the Roche Group.
Roche is the majority shareholder in Chugai Pharmaceutical, Japan.
For more information, please visit www.roche.com.
All trademarks used or mentioned in this release are protected by law.
References
[1] This product has not been FDA cleared or approved, but has been authorized by the FDA under an EUA for non-prescription home use (OTC) with self- and adult-collected anterior nasal swab samples.
This product has been authorized only for the detection of proteins from SARS-CoV-2, not for any other viruses or pathogens.
The emergency use of this product is only authorized for the duration of the declaration that circumstances exist justifying the authorization of emergency use of in-vitro diagnostics for detection and/or diagnosis of COVID-19 under Section 564(b)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. §360bbb-3(b)(1), unless the declaration is terminated or authorization is revoked sooner.
[2] SD Biosensor.
(2021).
COVID-19 At-Home Test package insert.
[3] Study data on file with National Institutes of Health, dated December 21, 2021.
Sensitivity is the test's ability to correctly identify a positive result, and specificity is the test's ability to correctly identify a negative result.
[4] Data on file with Roche Diagnostics.
For further information please contact
[email protected]
Gina Goodenough
[email protected]
+1 317-734-7171
SOURCE Roche
While COVID cases may be on the rise, UAB experts say the circumstances are different now that much of the population has been vaccinated or developed some natural immunity from previous infection, and the same stringent protocols utilized at the height of the pandemic are largely not necessary.
One of those experts, UAB School of Public Health Epidemiologist Suzanne Judd, Ph.D., says the most important thing is to act responsibly if you have any respiratory illness – which means limiting others’ exposure to your symptoms.
“If you have symptoms of any respiratory illness, it is best to take steps to protect other people, whether you have COVID, common cold, RSV or the flu,” Judd said.
“We are no longer seeing the high volume of severe COVID we once did because – among other reasons – many of us now have antibodies.”
If you have symptoms of any respiratory illness, Judd says you should consider:
Avoiding other people
Wearing a mask
Seeing your healthcare provider if symptoms get worse; follow guidance
Washing hands frequently
Practice healthy behavior Practice good hand hygiene
Avoid sick people
Get the flu and COVID vaccine when available
Stay home if you have symptoms
Read UAB emails/newsletters for information and resources
Judd says typical measures people take to avoid respiratory illness – like hand hygiene and avoiding sick people – are sufficient for the average person.
“People who have compromised immune systems or have pre-existing conditions that increase their risk of serious disease, should consider additional precautions – they may choose to mask or avoid indoor gatherings,” Judd said, “And everyone should get vaccinated for flu and COVID when vaccines become available.”
New flu and COVID vaccines are expected to be available this fall.
“COVID doesn’t pose the threat it once did and can be largely treated like other respiratory illnesses that we don’t want to spread,” Judd says.
“It remains important that we all do what we can to help keep ourselves and our community safe with healthy behaviors.”
UAB Medicine employees should continue to follow guidance and policies specific to healthcare professionals.
A meta-analysis of 41 long-COVID studies identifies female sex, older age, obesity, smoking, underlying medical conditions, and previous hospitalization or intensive care unit (ICU) admission as risk factors for developing the condition, while two-dose vaccination was protective.
In the meta-analysis, published today in JAMA Internal Medicine, a team led by Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital in the United Kingdom searched the Medline and Embase databases for studies on long-COVID risk factors, protective factors, and clinical predictors published up to December 5, 2022.
The researchers noted that previous studies on long-COVID risk factors have involved relatively few patients and that wide discrepancies in the published data have yielded unclear results.
"Not only is it important to recognize which individuals may be at high risk of developing PCC [post-COVID condition] and to offer follow-up care; it is imperative to plan population-level public health measures," they wrote.
Hospitalization, ICU stay more than double the risk
The 41 studies of 860,783 hospitalized and nonhospitalized patients revealed several risk factors for long COVID, including female sex (odds ratio [OR], 1.56), age older than 40 years (OR, 1.21), obesity (OR, 1.15), smoking (OR, 1.10), chronic conditions (OR, 2.48), and previous hospitalization (OR, 2.48) or ICU admission (OR, 2.37).
But patients who had received two doses of COVID-19 vaccine had a significantly lower risk of long COVID than those who weren't vaccinated (OR, 0.57).
Underlying medical conditions significantly associated with long COVID were anxiety and/or depression (OR, 1.19), asthma (OR, 1.24), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; OR, 1.38), diabetes (OR, 1.06), suppressed immune system (OR, 1.50), and ischemic heart disease (OR, 1.28).
Taking a holistic approach
Some researchers have proposed that the link between female sex and long COVID may be due to hormones, which may perpetuate the hyperinflammatory status of the acute phase of COVID-19, the authors noted, adding that greater production of immunoglobulin G antibodies in females during infection could also have a role.
Obesity may be associated with long COVID because the two conditions share a metabolic pro-inflammatory condition that promotes a longer duration of signs and symptoms, the researchers said.
And "smoking has been shown to be a significant risk factor for both PCC and severe acute COVID-19 infection," they wrote.
"However, it is unclear whether smoking per se or the associated severe illness predisposes this cohort of patients to higher risk of PCC.
"
The tie between hospitalization or ICU admission suggests that critically ill COVID-19 patients' follow-up should include intensive plans for prevention, rehabilitation, and treatment of symptoms, the researchers said.
COVID-19 vaccination, they said, has benefits beyond that of preventing and ameliorating infection.
"Importantly, emerging evidence suggests that vaccination reduces the risk of PCC and its sequelae even in individuals with other risk factors, such as older age or high BMI [body mass index]," they wrote.
The authors concluded by saying that long-COVID patients may need long-term support but that substantial pandemic-related health system burdens may not always allow this.
Emerging evidence suggests that vaccination reduces the risk of long COVID and its sequelae even in individuals with other risk factors, such as older age or high body mass index.
"Given these results, a holistic approach and integrated care pathways may enable suitable support for patients who develop PCC and may allow physicians to be better prepared to care for patients at high risk of developing PCC," they wrote.
Beginning in early March 2020, military forces in the State of New York, comprising the Army National Guard, Air National Guard, Naval Militia, and State Guard, with contributions from the Army Corps of Engineers, mobilized to respond to the coronavirus pandemic.
The ongoing New York State Operation COVID-19 (OPCOV19) has become the largest domestic mobilization in U.S. history—by duration, volume of deployed soldiers, and diversity of missions.
Kai Ruggeri, PhD, assistant professor of health policy and management at Columbia University School of Public Health, a former specialist in the New York Guard, and current officer candidate in the US Air Force (New York Air National Guard), is lead author of an article in JAMA Health Forum that details the COVID-related contributions of these military forces and offers lessons learned for the future.
As part of OPCOV19, over 7,000 service members have served across 200 COVID mission sites, administering over 4 million vaccines, producing over 35 million testing kits, delivering over 54 million meals, and administering over 1.5 million tests.
At the April 2020 mobilization peak, 3,646 service members were actively serving the State on a single day.
The rapid vaccine rollout in early 2021—at its peak, 2,790 service members served at the Javits Center vaccination center in New York City alone—and testing support helped prevent tens of thousands of deaths and allowed hospitals to focus on all levels of treatment and care such as cancer treatment and outpatient surgery.
On March 7, 2020 then-Gov Andrew Cuomo signed Executive Order 202 declaring a state of emergency for the State of New York.
This action made available 270 service members from the New York Army National Guard and Air National Guard, who deployed two days later to New Rochelle in Westchester County, the location of the first outbreak in the state, where they provided community services, primarily in the form of meal preparation and distribution.
In the following months, OPCOV19, under the civilian direction of New York State and coordinated by New York State Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Services, provided critical services, delivering relief, testing, care, vaccination, and other community support.
Activities included PPE distribution, food delivery, recovery of the deceased, cleaning and decontamination, and the establishment and operations of drive-through testing sites, mobile testing sites, and airport health screenings.
At nursing homes, New York Military Forces (NYMF) provided staffing, and medical support, ranging from direct testing to full-time labor backfill.
Service members also served as data scientists, working alongside public health officers to capitalize on the large amounts of data generated to combat the pandemic.
Data modeling of pandemic trends enabled missions to mobilize at high speed, making NYMF sites operational before trends were publicly reported.
These actions were directly responsible for the early availability of mass testing and vaccination that played a critical role in saving lives.
During this time, NYMF service members continued to serve in other roles, including 1,300 soldiers deployed to Washington, D.C., due to the violence at the U.S. Capital and protests in the summer of 2020 and fall of 2021.
They also were mobilized during natural disasters, combat deployments, and other long-term missions, including Joint Task Force Empire Shield, which is partly responsible for the military defense of New York City.
Ruggeri and his co-authors offer lessons learned from the NYMF responses to the pandemic.
Among these are a need for greater coordination between healthcare institutions and the NYMF, and improved recruitment of healthcare professionals in the National Guard.
Nevertheless, the NYMF COVID-19 response showed that full-time soldiers and reservists who bring civilian skills have a major role to play from patient-facing medical support to coordinating drive-in testing sites to backroom data analytics.
“Every service member can become a public health professional if the situation demands it,” says Ruggeri.
“Thousands of service members have played a critical role in protecting the health of New Yorkers statewide.”
The article is co-authored by members of the New York State Division of Military and Naval Affairs, New York Army National Guard, and New York Air National Guard.
A full list of authors is available in the journal article.
Yakierra Minor
Guest columnist
Before COVID, I enjoyed school.
I would get up before the sun came up and get dressed for my day.
I would be so excited to go and talk to some friends and learn new things.
Math was my favorite subject.
For me, math was straightforward.
I didn’t struggle with interpretations of formulas, numbers or the answers.
I loved to go to school.
It was a reason to get out of the house.
I found excitement for my life in school.
Once COVID hit Oklahoma, all of that changed.
If you would’ve told me then that I would be struggling in school academically and emotionally, I would not have believed you.
What changed?
For about the first two months at home, I did not take COVID seriously.
Doing schoolwork on Teams was new.
I was so used to being in class and not surrounded by distractions.
Being around family is fun, but that also comes with immediate distractions.
It was easy to get bored and turn to playing a game instead of focusing on schoolwork.
Because of the uncertainty and scare about COVID, I did not step outside of my house for months.
Then one day, during a video class break, my sister and I went outside and just stood in the sun.
That was the start of a ritual that became longer each day.
We’d walk down the street and back, look at the flowers, the clouds, the sunset.
We developed a new appreciation for nature and the outdoors.
Since then, every opportunity I got, I would go outside ― during breaks and after school.
All this led me to think about how much time we spend in the classroom and whether the structure of schools should be reformed to include a more open environment for different types of learning.
I spend about seven hours a day for five days a week at school over 36 weeks.
But the current structure no longer works well for me.
Thanks to COVID, I would prefer to be able to choose whether I want to spend my time in an inside classroom or in a classroom outside.
When children have the option to choose how they are going to learn, it gives them more freedom.
I know from experience that with more freedom I feel more comfortable, and it allows me to be more creative and express myself more.
I believe that, for some students, choosing how they learn something could change their attitude about school and how they behave in school.
Linking lessons to the real world
If students are getting a brief lesson from their teacher, then go out into the world to see how it applies in real life, they can automatically link an experience to what they have learned.
They could add even more knowledge to what they have learned in the classroom, and it would raise their understanding of how practical lessons interact with the realities of life.
Too often, students' opinions are suppressed because they are deemed inexperienced.
I have heard plenty of times that no one knows you like you know yourself.
That also applies to kids.
Kids would know which learning environment they feel more productive in and what interests them.
Allowing them to voice their wants and needs helps the kids be more attentive and actually enjoy themselves as they learn.
Adults should have meaningful conversations with students that allow them to express their concerns about what’s best for them.
Minimal changes that can be made to have meaningful results in the growing youth.
I am not saying to not have mandatory schooling, but I am saying the current structure does not work for everyone.
For kids like me, going back to school has been boring.
We have been through so much change that returning to a normal school setting has been both underwhelming and overwhelming.
Allow students to get something close to what they had during COVID in the school building but in a format that is not so restricted.
Allow students time by themselves to decompress.
The current traditional learning environment does not allow all students to thrive.
Offer options that allow students to spend more time outside.
We are conditioned at an early age to the cycle of going to school and staying there for hours on end.
I am grateful that the pandemic did cause the schools to shut down because if it were not for the pandemic, I would not have realized how much I like the outdoors.
I would not have realized how much nature helps me to learn better.
Yakierra Minor is a senior at Harding Charter Preparatory High School in Oklahoma City.
By now, people know that certain groups, such as those with heart conditions, run a higher risk of COVID-19 infection and hospitalization..
But is arthritis a similar high-risk category?
Anna Border, M.D. , a rheumatologist at Hackensack University and Medical Center , weighs in.
How Does COVID Affect People With Arthritis?
While the health community is still learning about COVID-19, there is no evidence that arthritis increases the rate of infection, re-infection or the need for hospitalization.
Some arthritis medications are immunosuppressants, however, and people taking these medications may be at a higher risk for developing COVID-19 and having a more complicated disease course.
“It doesn’t seem that people who have arthritis and then develop COVID-19 have a different disease course than anyone else would,” Dr. Border says.
“We’re finding that how people with arthritis fare with COVID largely depends not on whether they have arthritis but whether they have other comorbidities like high blood pressure, diabetes or high body weight.”
As the virus continues to change and more information comes to light, Dr. Border emphasizes the need for vaccination.
“Vaccination is preventing people with rheumatological conditions from developing severe COVID-19, so it’s important for people to get vaccinated.
"
Can COVID Cause Arthritis?
The short answer is yes, it can.
Dr. Border explains: “It’s been well established that viral conditions predispose people to developing arthritis.
People can develop arthritis after having the flu or any virus.
These are common culprits, and COVID-19 is no different.”
Studies have yet to show whether arthritis due to COVID-19 runs the same course as other types of viral arthritis or if it will lead to other rheumatological conditions, Dr. Border says.
It will be difficult to pinpoint if COVID-19 is a true cause of arthritis in some people because of a lack of control groups to study and the fact that arthritis is a common condition..
Next Steps & Resources:
Meet our source: Anna Border, M.D.
To make an appointment with a rheumatologist near you, call 800-822-8905 or visit our website.
The material provided through HealthU is intended to be used as general information only and should not replace the advice of your physician.
Always consult your physician for individual care.
The humanitarian and health crisis that Honduras is experiencing as a result of COVID-19 has exacerbated the difficulties of access to socio-economic and healthcare rights for people in situations of greater vulnerability, as well as those who are in a situation of poverty and extreme poverty.
Many people have been affected by the loss of loved ones, financial challenges, hunger, domestic violence, uncertainty about the future and social stigma.
The pandemic has caused a significant increase in people with mental health and substance use disorders.
The availability of mental health services is scarce.
Existing services are very much focused around institutional care across the three hospitals that care for patients with severe conditions.
Implementation and Achievements
In Honduras, the needs assessment and resource mapping exercises focused on the areas of Intibucá and Yamaranguila.
Honduras’ National Mental Health Action Plan is currently under review by the national-level Mental Health Technical Working group.
PAHO will continue to support the revision of the plan, while advocating for the integration of emergency MHPSS elements.
The mhGAP training for primary health care workers had the participation of the staff of the Intibucá Health Network, including Medical Personnel, Nurses, Social Workers and Specialist Doctors.
The total number of participants who completed the training was 20 people, of whom16 were females and 4 were males.
The participants were from 5 health care centers from the main hospital in the area and the district's health management team.
The main objectives were: (i) train frontline staff in the prevention and management of people with mental health conditions and (ii) develop a mhGAP implementation plan with trainees, to be implemented in the coming months.
Psychosocial First Aid training was given to Nursing Staff, Social Workers, General Practitioners, Social Managers and Technicians.
The total number of participants who completed the training was 52 people, of whom 48 were females and 4 were males from 16 different health structures and 6 non-health institutions.
In addition, a broad communication campaign was developed through a collaboration between SESAL and PAHO's communication team.
The main objective of the campaign was to contribute to the adoption of positive changes in individual, family, community and inter-institutional behavior related to MHPSS and the promotion of healthy habits targeting on indigenous populations.
U.S. regulators on Thursday cleared doses of the updated COVID-19 vaccines for children younger than age 5.
The Food and Drug Administration’s decision aims to better protect the littlest kids from severe COVID-19 at a time when children’s hospitals already are packed with tots suffering from a variety of respiratory illnesses.
Omicron-targeted booster shots made by Moderna and rival Pfizer already were open to everyone 5 and older.
READ MORE: Pfizer seeks FDA authorization of updated COVID-19 shot for kids under 5
The FDA now has cleared their use in tots starting at age 6 months — but just who is eligible depends on what vaccinations they’ve already had, and which kind.
Few youngsters have gotten the full primary series since shots for the littlest kids began in June.
The FDA decided that:
–Children under age 6 who’ve already gotten two original doses of Moderna’s COVID-19 vaccine can get a single booster of Moderna’s updated formula if it’s been at least two months since their last shot.
–Pfizer’s vaccine requires three initial doses for tots under age 5 — and those who haven’t finished that vaccination series will get the original formula for the first two shots and the omicron-targeted version for their third shot.
–Children under 5 who already got all three Pfizer doses aren’t yet eligible for an updated booster.
Data expected next month should help the FDA determine if and when those tots need the omicron-targeted booster.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is expected to sign off soon, the final step for shots to begin.
Just 3% of tots under 2 and nearly 5% of those 2 to 4 have gotten their primary doses so far, according to the CDC.
“Vaccines remain the best defense against the most devastating consequences of disease caused by the currently circulating omicron variant,” FDA vaccine chief Dr. Peter Marks said in a statement.
The updated vaccines from Moderna and Pfizer are combination shots, containing half the original vaccine and half tweaked to match the BA.4 and BA.5 omicron strains that until recently were dominant.
Now BA.5 descendants are responsible for most COVID-19 cases.
The CDC last month released the first real-world data showing that an updated booster, using either company’s version, does offer added protection to adults.
The analysis found the greatest benefit was in people who’d never had a prior booster, just two doses of the original COVID-19 vaccine — but that even those who’d had a summertime dose were more protected than if they’d skipped the newest shot.
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Science and Educational Media Group.
The AP is solely responsible for all content.
Credit: Stock Image
Infants born in 2020 through mid-2021 to women with COVID-19 weighed less at birth, but grew at a faster rate than a comparable group born to women who did not have COVID-19, according to a study funded by the National Institutes of Health.
Previous studies have found that preterm infants and other infants who are small or underweight at birth and who undergo catch-up growth in the first year are at higher risk for later life obesity, heart disease, high blood pressure and diabetes, compared to infants born at normal weight.
The authors called for additional studies of infants whose mothers had COVID-19 during pregnancy to learn if they have increased health risks later in life.
The study was conducted by Andrea Edlow, M.D., and Lindsay Fourman, M.D., of Massachusetts General Hospital, and colleagues.
It appears in The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism.
NIH funding was provided by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development with additional support from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
Background
According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in 2020, pregnant women comprised 9% of reproductive aged women with COVID-19.
Compared to nonpregnant females of similar age, pregnant people with COVID-19 are more likely to experience severe disease, more likely to be admitted to an intensive care unit, and more likely to need mechanical ventilation to help them breathe.
Mothers with COVID-19 are more likely than those without the infection to give birth preterm and to have hypertensive disorders of pregnancy.
Moreover, placentas from pregnancies complicated by COVID-19 are often inflamed at the junction between the maternal and fetal parts of the placenta and contain higher amounts of immune cells from mother and fetus.
Despite these ill effects, pregnant people with COVID-19 are unlikely to pass the virus on to their babies.
However, few studies have been conducted on the potential long-term effects that may be experienced by children born to mothers with COVID-19 during pregnancy.
For the current study, researchers compared weight, length, and body mass index (BMI) at birth, 2 months, 6 months, and 12 months of 149 babies born to mothers with COVID-19 during pregnancy to those of 127 babies born to mothers without any symptoms of COVID-19.
For each infant, researchers calculated a z-score for each of the three measures.
Z-scores are a comparison measure of an individual to a formal standard—in this case, average weight, length, and body measurements compiled as growth charts by the World Health Organization.
Results
At birth, infants born to mothers with COVID-19 and those born to mothers without COVID-19 did not differ in average z-scores for length.
However, those exposed to COVID-19 during pregnancy had an average birth weight z-score that was 30% lower than those not exposed and a BMI z-score that was 35% lower than that of the unexposed infants.
By 12 months, infants exposed to COVID-19 in the uterus had a 53% greater gain in BMI z-score than the infants not exposed to COVID-19.
Although preterm infants often have a similar pattern of accelerated growth in comparison to term infants, the authors did not find preterm birth to be the cause of the rapid growth they saw in their study, as the z-scores considered gestational age at birth, and the study did not include enough preterm infants to account for the difference.
In fact, the difference between the two groups persisted, even after researchers statistically compensated for factors known to influence infant size, such as the mother’s age and BMI.
Significance
The pattern of catch-up growth seen in infants exposed to COVID-19 during pregnancy may place them at risk for heart disease and other obesity-related illnesses later in life.
The findings underscore the need to prevent COVID-19 in pregnant people using such protective measures as vaccination and wearing masks indoors, before and during pregnancy.
Reference
Ockene, MW, et al.
Accelerated longitudinal weight gain among infants with in utero COVID-19 exposure.
The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism.
2023.
Quick Summary:
Asymptomatic individuals who have a “close-contact exposure," which was redefined in the guidance, are not required to quarantine but should take specific actions regardless of their vaccination status, including testing for COVID-19 three to five days after the last exposure, continuing to wear a well-fitting mask around others as still required in health care settings, and staying home if symptoms do develop and testing for COVID-19 using an antigen test.
If exposure occurred at work, Cal/OSHA requires the employer to provide for testing.
Workers in dental offices and other high-risk settings in California are no longer required to quarantine after a close-contact exposure with someone who has COVID-19 if the exposed worker is asymptomatic and does not test positive, according to state Department of Public Health guidance issued in November.
Specifically, asymptomatic individuals who have a “close-contact exposure,” which was redefined in the guidance, are not required to quarantine but should do the following, regardless of their vaccination status:
Test for COVID-19 three to five days after the last exposure.
Individuals who test before day 3 and have a negative result should test at least once more during the five-day window.
If exposure occurred at work, Cal/OSHA requires the employer to provide for testing.
Continue to wear a well-fitting mask around others as still required in all health care settings.
Stay home if symptoms do develop and test for COVID-19 using an antigen test.
If the test result is positive, the individual should isolate for at least five days after symptoms start or after the first positive test if no symptoms, as well as follow all other recommended steps in table 1 of the guidance.
An antigen test, nucleic acid amplification test, PCR or LAMP test are acceptable diagnostic tests for COVID-19, but antigen testing is recommended for infected persons to end isolation and for symptomatic people who had a close contact.
The updated guidance should not be followed in the case of a local outbreak.
In those instances, health care facilities should consult with their local health jurisdiction and follow Cal/OSHA regulations on managing outbreaks.
The current and anticipated final Cal/OSHA ETS is slated to end Dec. 31 with the Cal/OSHA board expecting to approve by vote a proposed nonemergency COVID-19 regulation to take effect Jan. 1, 2023.
Shortened testing time frame for previously infected individuals
Several other changes to the state's updated quarantine and isolation guidance apply to dentists, including to the recommended time previously infected individuals should not test for COVID-19.
Instead of 90 days, the CDPH now recommends previously infected individuals not test for 30 days.
This update aligns with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s updated testing guidance and reflects “the increased immune escape of the recent Omicron variant leading to more repeat infections,” CDPH states in its isolation and quarantine Q&A.
Employers’ COVID-19 reporting obligations continue.
CDA updated three COVID-19 resources to reflect the updated state guidance.
California dentists can use:
Find dozens more COVID-19 resources related to employee management, infection control, laboratory testing and more in CDA’s resource library.
U-M encourages you to get the most up-to-date COVID-19 vaccine recommended by the CDC and to report your COVID-19 vaccination to the university.
Students in Michigan Housing must report other routine immunization information, as well.
In the fall semester, we will hold multiple clinics offering vaccines for both COVID-19 and influenza.
Certain units, such as Michigan Medicine, University Health Service, and the School of Dentistry, have local-level policies requiring vaccinations under certain conditions.
Share on Pinterest FG Trade/Getty Images A new study found that COVID-19 has “waxing and waning of symptoms,” whether people are treated with the anti-viral Paxlovid, or not.
Researchers looked at 158 participants for 29 days and found that over 30% of those reporting a complete absence of symptoms, reported that symptoms had returned.
Case reports have previously associated the return of COVID-19 symptoms with use of the antiviral drug Paxlovid.
In May, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued a Health Alert Network (HAN) advisory to update healthcare providers, public health departments, and the public about potential recurrence of COVID-19 or “COVID-19 rebound.”
Case reports have previously associated the recurrence of symptoms with use of the antiviral drug Paxlovid.
However, new research published in the JAMA Network Open finds that COVID-19 has “waxing and waning of symptoms,” whether people are treated with Paxlovid, or not.
“Paxlovid, an investigational drug being studied for safety and effectiveness, [is] used to treat mild to severe cases of COVID-19,” Christopher Calandrella, DO, chair of emergency medicine, Long Island Jewish Forest Hills in Queens, told Healthline.
“[It] works by targeting specific parts of the virus to stop its multiplication in the body preventing severe illness and death,” he explained.
What is Paxlovid rebound?
“Paxlovid rebound is a phenomenon where someone takes Paxlovid, their symptoms improve, and their test on antigen testing at home might even turn negative and then a period of time goes by when they’re asymptomatic,” said Dr. Eric Cioe-Pena, director of Global Health for Northwell Health in New York.
“Then a few days to a few weeks later they develop a symptomatic COVID infection again,” he continued.
Asked if we know why this happens, Cioe-Pena said it was previously believed to have something to do with the medication.
“The previously established theory was that the medication causes a temporary reduction in viral replication,” he explained.
“But does not help your immune system clear the virus completely, and then the symptoms rebound, because viral replication increases again in your body.”
Over one-third reported symptoms had returned For this study, researchers from the University of California San Diego (UCSD) School of Medicine and colleagues from the ACTIV-2 trial, examined if COVID-19 symptoms recurred following two days of being symptom-free in patients who received no treatment.
They wanted to determine if symptom recurrence in the untreated might be different from those already documented in people treated with Paxlovid, known as ‘ Paxlovid rebound. ’
Researchers looked at 13 COVID-19 symptoms in 158 participants for 29 days and found that over 33% of those reporting a complete absence of symptoms, for at least two consecutive days, reported that symptoms had returned.
”It is clear that COVID-19 has waxing and waning of symptoms, whether they are treated or not,” study lead author, Dr. Davey M. Smith, head of Infectious Diseases and Global Public Health at UC San Diego School of Medicine, said in a statement.
Symptoms were mild Findings showed that 85 percent of participants with recurring symptoms described them as mild, and the remaining people said symptoms were moderate.
No one in the study described their recurrent symptoms as severe.
The most common recurrent symptoms were: Cough
Fatigue
Headache Only eight in the study group were hospitalized for their illness, and none of those were participants who experienced recurrent symptoms.
Study only looked at older variants of COVID-19
A significant limitation of the UCSD study is that researchers only analyzed older strains of COVID-19 from before life-saving vaccines were available.
This could make it difficult to understand how often rebound symptoms occur with current or future variants.
“Statistically the study was focused on a relatively small group of patients which did not include variants such as omicron,” said Calandrella, “And most importantly, vaccinated patients.”
Calandrella pointed out that vaccination is still key to stopping severe disease.
“While it is important to alleviate the concerns regarding the risks of taking medications such as Paxlovid,” he said.
“We are fortunate to have vaccinations available, which are likely to be the greater contributing factor for seeing a reduction in the severe cases of COVID infections.”
Study dispels some concerns about Paxlovid “This research certainly presents an interesting perspective that is new and offers to discredit one of the major weaknesses of Paxlovid which is that you may just get sick later in the course of your COVID infection,” said Cioe-Pena.
Cioe-Pena, who concluded that there’s a need for more research into this.
“The other thing [is] that this may introduce is doubt over how long the course of medication should be in order to account for some of these resurgent infections,” he added.
Cioe-Pena noted that these findings “definitely call into question” the proposed mechanism of Paxlovid rebound.
He said that there might be something intrinsic to the virus, and its ability to dodge immunity, that causes this rebound as a natural part of the virus’ infectious cycle.
One of the biggest scientific applications to come from the pandemic can be found in the immunology that led to the development of the highly effective COVID-19 vaccines.
As the vortex of the COVID-19 pandemic consumed the world in 2020, scientists worked at a frantic pace to understand the new virus sweeping the globe.
The discoveries surrounding SARS-CoV-2 were impressive not only for the speed in which they took place, but also for the new pathways of research they opened.
Image Deepta Bhattacharya, PhD, professor in the UArizona College of Medicine – Tucson’s Department of Immunobiology, was the featured speaker at the first Tomorrow is Here Lecture Series on May 16 in Tucson.
To the average person, it looked as though scientists were making daily breakthroughs as spike proteins, antibodies and messenger RNA vaccines became topics of everyday conversation.
But revolutionary discoveries are rarely “Eureka!”
moments.
Instead, scientific advances are almost always the culmination of research that occurs outside of the spotlight.
In the realm of immunology, decades of research on the immune system, the human genome and a multitude of other viruses laid the foundation to quickly unravel the mysteries of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19.
The immediate end goal was met when COVID-19 vaccines and treatments became available.
But the impact of that research is far from over, according to Deepta Bhattacharya, PhD, keynote speaker at the inaugural University of Arizona Health Sciences Tomorrow is Here Lecture Series.
He believes the lessons learned during the COVID-19 pandemic have the potential to change the future of science.
“The pandemic has shown us that the tools are out there to make infectious disease far less burdensome, not only in the U.S., but globally,” said Dr. Bhattacharya, professor of immunobiology in the UArizona College of Medicine – Tucson and BIO5 Institute member.
“We've shown what our technology can do and what our responses can be, and I don't see any reason to accept the status quo anymore.”
One of the pandemic’s biggest lessons, Dr. Bhattacharya said, is that the basics matter.
Science, once discovered, stays discovered
Image Eric Lander (Whitehead Institute) spoke at a 2003 press conference for the publications describing the initial analyses of the human genome sequence.
(Courtesty of National Human Genome Research Institute)
“When people say the COVID-19 vaccines were developed in record time, they really weren't,” Dr. Bhattacharya said.
“They were built on the backs of decades of research that allowed us to move quickly.”
Three decades before an unknown virus surfaced in Wuhan, China, scientists were undertaking a massive endeavor known as the Human Genome Project.
The intent was to sequence and map all of the genes – 3 billion in total – that make up the human genome.
In the beginning, the available technology was unreliable and slow, preventing researchers from sequencing more than a few hundred genes at a time.
As technology improved, sequencing rates increased dramatically, and in April 2003, the Human Genome Project succeeded in reading the complete genetic blueprint of a human being.
“We've shown what our technology can do and what our responses can be, and I don't see any reason to accept the status quo anymore.”
Deepta Bhattacharya, PhD
“The Human Genome Project was criticized by people who asked, ‘What are we really learning from this?
What diseases have been cured by understanding and knowing the human genome sequence?”
Dr. Bhattacharya said.
“But it's important not to just focus on immediately translatable outcomes.
Think about all of the outcomes that came as a result of that project, some of which undoubtedly were the sequencing technologies.”
The same sequencing technologies that unraveled the mysteries of the human genome could be applied to viruses.
Fast forward to January 2020, and within weeks of being confronted by an unknown pathogen, scientists sequenced and identified the novel coronavirus they dubbed SARS-CoV-2.
“Some of the technologies people criticized for not necessarily having an immediate translational impact, now very obviously did,” Dr. Bhattacharya said.
Prevention and preparedness are key
Image Work done by scientists in the Vaccine Research Center at the National Institues of Health on respiratory syncytial virus and a common coronavirus laid the foundation for the development of COVID-19 vaccines.
(Courtesty of National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH)
The Human Genome Project started in 1990, but the research that laid the foundation for the COVID-19 vaccines has an even longer history.
As early as the mid-1970s, immunologists were studying common coronaviruses that affected other species, including mouse hepatitis virus.
“It was, in some ways, thankless work.
The researchers were asked, why are you studying this?
This is a mouse coronavirus – why do you care what disease it causes?”
Dr. Bhattacharya said.
“What the pandemic has shown us is that those studies taught us an awful lot in terms of preparedness.
From these studies, it turned out that the immune response needed to be aimed at a particular protein that the virus makes called spike.”
Identifying the virus’s Achilles heel wasn’t enough, though.
Researchers needed to find a way to engineer the spike protein to create an immune response against the virus.
That work happened at the National Institutes of Health’s Vaccine Research Center.
There, scientists were studying respiratory syncytial virus, which causes severe respiratory infections in children, and another common coronavirus that causes cold-like symptoms.
Once engineered, the spike protein needed to be safely delivered to the cell’s nucleus without killing the cell.
Again, the answer came from research that was decades in the making – in this case, messenger RNA (mRNA) research at the University of Pennsylvania.
“All of that early work – that sort of circuitous path science sometimes takes – led us to figure out the perfect solution to generate vaccines and immune responses to emerging pathogens,” said Dr. Bhattacharya.
A structure for the future
On the scientific front, one of the biggest applications from the pandemic can be found in the immunology that led to the development of the highly effective COVID-19 vaccines.
Image Dr. Bhattacharya hopes to apply some of the technologies developed to target SARS-CoV-2 to his work on flaviviruses.
“I think structure-based vaccinology is the wave of the future,” said Dr. Bhattacharya, whose primary research focuses on a family of viruses known as flaviviruses, which cause diseases including dengue, Zika, Japanese encephalitis, yellow fever and West Nile.
“The pandemic really showed the power of that particular approach to actually control the immune system and what it's aimed at.
Some of the technologies that came from COVID-19 can absolutely be applied to the flaviviruses, as well.”
Dr. Bhattacharya, who hopes to develop an effective vaccine for flaviviruses, says none of the flaviviruses have come close to causing the worldwide destruction perpetuated by SARS-CoV-2, though scientists were surprised by the spread of the Zika virus, which reached epidemic status in Brazil in 2016.
Still, no one knows which virus could be the source of the next pandemic.
“We don't really know what's going to come next, so that means studying families of not just viruses, but also bacteria and fungi, and building up that broad knowledge base and technology that allows us to move quickly,” he said.
“Prevention and preparedness are worth many tons of cure for infectious diseases.”
The work of Texas Tribune journalists has a lasting impact in Texas, and our journalists go deep to break down complicated issues that impact you.
Support independent Texas journalism by becoming part of the Texas Tribune member community.
Hospitalization numbers are about three times lower than this time last year.
COVID hospitalizations rise for 5th consecutive week but remain 3 times lower than same time last year: CDC
COVID hospitalizations in the U.S. have risen for a fifth consecutive week, with 12,613 new admissions in the week ending Aug. 12 -- an increase of 21.6% from the prior week, according to new data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The new admissions are still at the 22nd lowest levels recorded since tracking began in August 2020; only 21 weeks have had lower levels out of nearly 160 weeks of data, the CDC said Monday night.
Current hospitalization numbers are about three times lower than the same time last year and about six times lower than in 2021, according to the CDC.
Deaths have remained relatively stable, the new data shows, with about 1.3% of all U.S. deaths being attributed to COVID.
There was a slight rise in deaths for the week ending on July 15, with an increase from 465 to 484 weekly deaths.
Data on deaths is often delayed and, as such, is labeled as "provisional" on the CDC website.
All currently circulating subvariants in the U.S. are related to XBB, a descendant of Omicron, according to the CDC.
A newer subvariant known as BA.2.86 was recently labeled a "variant under monitoring" by the World Health Organization, following concern among some scientists due to its high number of mutations.
Only about six cases have been reported so far with this subvariant.
The cases were found spread around the world in individuals without travel history, suggesting an established international transmission, according to a recent risk assessment by the United Kingdom's Health Security Agency.
Study design
A large community-based sample of adults living within the Chicago, IL metropolitan area was recruited to participate in a study called Screening for Coronavirus Antibodies in Neighborhoods (SCAN).
Samples for this analysis were collected between June 24 and November 11, 2020, prior to availability of SARS-CoV-2 vaccination in the area4.
The study included a total of 4463 adults at this time point.
Participation was facilitated by a web-based, “no contact” protocol, which allowed individuals to provide information and dried blood spot (DBS) samples outside of a clinical setting.
Participants were recruited via advertisements in social media, emails, print flyers, newspapers, participant registries, participant referrals, community outreach, and local press.
Recruitment was conducted in neighborhoods throughout the Chicago metropolitan area and at the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine (FSM) in Chicago.
To ensure racial and gender diversity and representation within the sample, we carried out stratified random sampling to adaptively match enrollment of white participants and women (groups that were more likely to complete the screener) to enrollment of non-white participants and men.
Study data were collected and managed using REDCap electronic data capture tools hosted at Northwestern University16,17.
All research activities were implemented under protocols approved by the institutional review board at Northwestern University (#STU00212457 and #STU00212472).
Written informed consent was received from all individuals prior to participation in this study, and all methods were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations.
Participants provided information about COVID-19 testing, diagnoses, and symptoms experienced after March 1, 2020.
Other variables included sex (based on assignment at birth), self-identified racial/ethnic identity, pre-existing chronic medical conditions (having one or more of the following: kidney disease, lung disease, diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, or body mass index > 30 kg/m2), smoking, number of individuals in their households, and whether any cohabitants had been diagnosed with COVID-19 or had symptoms of COVID-19.
After completing the survey, a kit containing materials for collecting a finger stick DBS sample was mailed to participants’ homes or made available for pick-up for onsite medical school participants.
The kit included instructions for self-collection, as well as information for online video instructions.
Following collection, samples were mailed to the lab for analysis using pre-stamped envelopes.
There was no difference in the number of days between the timing of reported symptoms and blood collection across seronegative and seropositive participants, and between participants who did and did not have detectable neutralization activity.
All study participants were comparable in the number of days since the start of the pandemic (defined as March 1, 2020) and the timing of blood collection (Supplementary Table 1).
Analyses presented here focus on the 17.7% (n = 790) of the 4463 total participants that tested seropositive for prior infection based on the presence of IgG antibodies against the RBD of SARS-CoV-218.
IgG antibodies were quantified using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) that has received emergency use authorization from the United States Food and Drug Administration (COVID-SeroKlir, Kantaro Biosciences).
This assay was adapted and validated for use with DBS samples18.
Evaluation of symptoms
Prior to DBS collection, participants indicated whether they had experienced any of the following eleven symptoms potentially associated with COVID-19: headache; fatigue or excessive sleepiness; sore throat; cough; muscle or body aches; runny nose; fever or chills; diarrhea, nausea, or vomiting; shortness of breath; loss of sense of smell or taste; and itchy eyes.
In a previous study, we identified a cluster of eight of these symptoms that were associated with higher SARS-CoV-2 IgG concentrations: headache; fatigue or excessive sleepiness; cough; muscle or body aches; fever or chills; diarrhea, nausea, or vomiting; shortness of breath; loss of sense of smell or taste14,15.
The symptoms not included in the cluster of eight are itchy eyes; runny nose; and sore throat.
A “COVID-19 symptom severity score” for each participant was created following methods described previously (Schrock et al.15).
Briefly, each of the eight symptoms associated with higher SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibody levels was weighted by the regression coefficient that resulted from a bivariate model that included the symptom as the independent variable and log10-transformed SARS-CoV-2 IgG concentration as the dependent variable.
For the symptom score, our goal was to establish the independent association between each individual symptom and SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibody levels—which was facilitated by using bivariate models (that did not include other symptoms).
Because participants reported distinct combinations of symptoms (i.e., reported some and not others), we did not seek to create scores that included the correlation between symptoms or their mutual influence, as doing so might under-or over-estimate the significance of the individual symptom.
The resulting symptom weights are: fever = 0.22, cough = 0.13, shortness of breath = 0.20, headache = 0.09, muscle or body aches = 0.19, fatigue or excessive sleepiness = 0.13, diarrhea/nausea/vomiting = 0.17, loss of taste/smell = 0.3215.
This composite variable indicated how severely each participant experienced symptoms associated with COVID-19 infection.
Measurement of SARS CoV-2 neutralizing antibody activity
All samples were analyzed in duplicate for anti-spike SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies with a commercially available surrogate virus neutralization test (sVNT) protocol (Meso Scale Diagnostics V-PLEX SARS-CoV-2 Panel 2
Kit; K15386U-2).
This method, which can be implemented with immunoassay techniques, contrasts with other conventional methods for measuring neutralizing activity that require the presence of live virus and specialized laboratory containment facilities.
Excellent concordance between results of these types of assays of NAb activity has been reported19.
To replicate the interaction that occurs between the virus and a host, the sVNT method incubates the blood samples with purified versions of viral spike protein and human ACE2 receptor.
The neutralizing antibodies present in the samples prevent the spike protein from binding to the ACE2 receptor, and the competitive immunoassay quantifies the degree of inhibition in order to measure NAbs levels.
The sVNT method was adapted and validated to measure neutralizing antibodies in DBS samples described here20.
Based on these validation results, the threshold for determining the presence of surrogate neutralization activity was set at 13.2% or higher20.
Statistical analyses
Patterns of association between symptoms and the presence of NAb were established using summary statistics and multiple linear regression analyses.
Due to the skewed distribution of NAb values, median values are presented as descriptive statistics and log10-transformed values were used for regression analyses.
Covariates in the multiple linear regression analyses included age, race/ethnicity, sex assigned at birth, and chronic pre-existing conditions.
All data analyses were conducted using R (version 4.0.4) in RStudio Version 1.4.110621.
DOH says it is making plans to circulate vaccines to underinsured or uninsured Washingtonians.
The program will distribute vaccines through community health centers and federally qualified health centers at no cost to patients.
DOH is also partnering with local pharmacies to do this.
“We are working very hard to expand access as we prepare for COVID-19 vaccine commercialization so that anyone is able to receive a COVID-19 vaccine who wants one,” said Drummond.
The state Department of Health is providing COVID and flu vaccinations through mobile clinics.
A schedule is available on DOH’s Care-a-Van website .
This DOH site can help you find a place to get a vaccine.
How can I avoid long COVID?
Even a mild COVID infection can develop into a chronic condition.
Long COVID can be debilitating, and we still don’t know much about it.
According to Chow, risk factors and the burden of care for long COVID are both difficult to gauge, as is the number of people who develop it.
“There’s some estimates out there
[that] as much as 10% of people who recover from COVID go on to develop these longer-term symptoms,” he said.
“But again, we’re still learning and this is something that we still need to invest more time to understand.”
Long COVID can arise even from mild infections, in people who may not otherwise have risk factors for developing serious illness.
That’s something to keep in mind when evaluating when to take precautions, said Chow.
“There’s some evidence to suggest that for those people who stayed up to date with the recommended vaccines, the risk might be lower, but I think that we’re still trying to better understand what role vaccines play in the longer-term symptoms,” he said.
“So ultimately it comes down to implementing those personal safety measures [like masking and ventilation] ...
the standard steps we take to prevent infection in the first place.”
For those already infected with COVID, said Drummond, “working with their health care provider to potentially access Paxlovid or other medical countermeasures or resources can help to reduce the potential of having long COVID.”
Are super-dodgers real?
Three years in, some people seemingly still have not gotten COVID.
Do they have a special immunity?
“It’s definitely possible,” said Chow.
But it’s more likely that if you’ve avoided COVID for this long, it’s for another reason.
Maybe you’ve taken serious precautions, kept up with vaccinations and simply avoided getting sick — or you did get COVID, but just never tested positive for it.
“It’s an important reminder that for some people, COVID comes in a variety of different severities.
Some people will have asymptomatic infection,” he said.
And if someone with a milder case hasn’t been regularly testing for it — and without symptoms, they would have little cause to do so — “they may not have ever known that they had the infection.”
The federal government has ended the COVID-19 public health emergency.
This means certain policies established during the pandemic have changed.
What won’t change is Kaiser Permanente’s dedication to providing high-quality care for COVID-19.
Here’s what you should know about what’s changing.
What’s changing, what’s not
Care and coverage
During the federal public health emergency, COVID-19 tests, vaccinations, and some treatments (such as Paxlovid) were available at no cost to most people.
Now that the public health emergency has ended:
Most members are able to continue to get COVID-19 vaccinations at no additional cost from Kaiser Permanente.
That’s because most of our plans cover preventive services without cost sharing.
Coverage and cost sharing for COVID-19 testing and treatment has changed for some of our members.
The changes depend on their plan and in what state they live.
Visit kp.org for details.
For Medicaid members, there are no immediate changes to COVID-19 care or coverage.
Face masks
Kaiser Permanente is no longer requiring people entering our health facilities to wear a mask that covers their nose, mouth, and chin unless it is mandated by city or county laws.
If masks are required in a particular facility or area, details will be posted on indoor and outdoor signs and communicated by staff.
It may be necessary to bring back mask-wearing in the future at Kaiser Permanente facilities based on new local laws or guidance from our infection prevention experts.
Protect yourself and your loved ones
The coronavirus remains a threat in our communities.
COVID-19 is currently causing thousands of infections and hundreds of deaths each day across the country.
Even now that the public health emergency has ended, if you’re sick, stay home and separate from others.
Get the latest guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on when and how to isolate.
Vaccination is the best way to prevent serious illness and hospitalization, not just for COVID-19 but also for the flu and other diseases.
Now may be the time for you or someone in your family to get their updated COVID-19 vaccination.
For the latest information on the COVID-19 vaccine and how to find an appointment in your area, visit kp.org/covidvaccine.
Among almost 43 million people in England who received at least one COVID-19 vaccine dose, the risk of myocarditis was substantially higher in the four weeks after COVID-19 infection than after a first dose of a COVID-19 vaccine, according to new study in Circulation
Research Highlights:
Among nearly 43 million people in England, ages 13 and older, who received at least one dose and up to 3 doses of a COVID-19 vaccine, fewer than 3,000 people (0.007%) were hospitalized or died with myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle, during the study period of December 1, 2020 through December 15, 2021.
Only 617 (0.001%) of the nearly 3,000 cases of myocarditis occurred during days 1-28 after receiving a COVID-19 vaccination.
Individuals with COVID-19 infection were at least 11 times more at risk for developing myocarditis in the 1-28 days after testing positive if COVID-19 infection occurred before COVID-19 vaccination.
The risk of developing myocarditis was substantially lower in the 1-28 days after COVID-19 vaccination than after COVID-19 infection, except for after a second dose of the Moderna vaccine.
The risk of COVID-19 vaccine-associated myocarditis was higher in men younger than age 40 after a first dose of an mRNA vaccine or after a second dose of any of the 3 vaccines.
Embargoed until 4 a.m. CT/5 a.m.
ET Monday, August 22, 2022
DALLAS, August 22, 2022 — In a detailed analysis of nearly 43 million people, the risk of myocarditis in unvaccinated individuals after COVID-19 infection was at least 11 times higher compared to people who developed myocarditis after receiving a COVID-19 vaccine or booster dose, according to new research published today in the American Heart Association’s flagship, peer-reviewed journal Circulation.
This analysis included data from England’s National Immunization database for people ages 13 and older who received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine between December 1, 2020 and December 15, 2021 in England.
Several previous studies and reports from public health agencies around the world including the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have highlighted a possible connection and potentially increased risk of myocarditis after receiving an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine, generating considerable scientific, policy and public interest .
Typically thought to be trigged by a viral infection, myocarditis is the inflammation of the heart muscle, the myocardium.
This condition is uncommon and may temporarily or permanently weaken the heart muscle and the heart’s electrical system, which keeps the heart beating normally.
An episode of myocarditis may resolve on its own or with treatment, and may result in lasting damage to the heart.
In the general population not during a global pandemic, it is estimated that approximately 10 to 20 people per 100,000 are diagnosed with myocarditis each year, according to the American Heart Association’s 2021 scientific statement on myocarditis.
“We found that across this large dataset, the entire COVID-19-vaccinated population of England during an important 12-month period of the pandemic when the COVID-19 vaccines first became available, the risk of myocarditis following COVID-19 vaccination was quite small compared to the risk of myocarditis after COVID-19 infection,” says first author of the study Martina Patone, Ph.D., a statistician at the Nuffield Department of Primary Health Care Sciences at the University of Oxford in Oxford, England.
“This analysis provides important information that may help guide public health vaccine campaigns, particularly since COVID-19 vaccination has expanded in many parts of the world to include children as young as 6 months old.”
In this study, Patone and colleagues evaluated England’s National Immunization database of COVID-19 vaccinations for all people ages 13 or older who had received at least one dose of the ChAdOx1 (a two-dose adenovirus-vector COVID-19 vaccine developed by the University of Oxford and AstraZeneca, most similar to the one-dose Johnson & Johnson/Janssen COVID-19 vaccine available in the U.S.), the Pfizer-BioNTech or the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine (the same mRNA vaccines available in the U.S.) between December 1, 2020 and December 15, 2021.
This dataset totaled nearly 43 million people, which included more than 21 million who had received a booster dose of any of the COVID-19 vaccines (meaning they had received a total of 3 doses of a COVID-19 vaccine).
The database detailed the type of COVID-19 vaccines received, dates received and dose sequencing, along with individual demographic information including age and sex for each individual.
Nearly 6 million people tested positive for COVID-19 infection either before or after COVID-19 vaccination during the study period.
England’s National Immunization database records were then cross-referenced and matched to the national offices with data on COVID-19 infection, hospital admission and death certificates for the same time period, December 1, 2020 through December 15, 2021.
Individuals were classified based on age and sex to reveal which groups had the highest risk of myocarditis after a COVID-19 vaccine or after COVID-19 infection and hospitalization.
The authors used the self-controlled case series (SCCS) method, which was developed to estimate the relative incidence of an acute event in a pre-defined post-vaccination risk period (1-28 days), compared to other times (pre-vaccination or long after vaccination).
Being a within-person comparison, the analyses were controlled to adjust for any fixed characteristics, including sex, race or ethnicity, or chronic health conditions.
In the overall dataset of nearly 43 million people, the analyses found:
Fewer than 3,000 (n=2,861), or 0.007%, people were hospitalized or died with myocarditis during the one-year study period.
617 of these cases of myocarditis occurred during days 1-28 after receiving a COVID-19 vaccination, of which 514 were hospitalized.
People who were infected with COVID-19 before receiving any doses of the COVID-19 vaccines were 11 times more at risk for developing myocarditis during days 1-28 after a COVID-19 positive test.
The risk of COVID-19 infection-related myocarditis risk was cut in half among people infected after vaccination (received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine).
The risk of myocarditis increased after a first dose of the ChAdOx1 COVID-19 vaccine (an adenovirus-vector vaccine most similar to the Johnson & Johnson/Janssen COVID-19 vaccine available in the U.S.) and after a first, second and booster dose of any of the mRNA COVID-19 vaccines.
However, the risk of vaccine-associated myocarditis was lower compared to the risk of COVID-19 infection-associated myocarditis, except for after a second dose of the Moderna vaccine.
Myocarditis risk was found to be higher during days 1-28 after a second dose of the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine for people of all genders and ages, and the risk also persisted after a booster dose of the Moderna vaccine.
However, people receiving a booster dose of Moderna were, on average, younger in comparison to those who received a booster dose of the ChAdOx1 or Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, therefore, results may not be generalizable to all adults.
Risk of COVID-19 vaccine-associated myocarditis among women:
Of the nearly 21 million women, 7.2 million (34%) were younger than age 40, and a slightly increased risk of myocarditis was found among this younger age group after receiving a second dose of the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine: 7 estimated extra cases of myocarditis for every one million women vaccinated.
Among women older than age 40, a slight increased risk of myocarditis was associated with receiving a first or third dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine, respectively 3 and 2 estimated additional cases of myocarditis for every one million women vaccinated.
Risk of COVID-19 infection-associated myocarditis among women:
Among women younger than age 40, the risk of infection-associated myocarditis was higher compared to the risk of vaccine-associated myocarditis: 8 extra cases associated with having COVID-19 infection before vaccination.
Among women older than age 40, the risk of infection-associated myocarditis was higher compared to the risk of vaccine-associated myocarditis: 51 extra cases associated with having COVID-19 infection before vaccination.
Risk of COVID-19 vaccine-associated myocarditis among men:
Among the 18 million men in the dataset, all of whom received at least one COVID-19 vaccine, more than 6 million men (34%) were younger than age 40.
An increased risk of vaccine-associated myocarditis was found in men ages 40 and younger after a first dose of either of the mRNA COVID-19 vaccines (4 and 14 estimated extra cases for every one million men vaccinated with respectively Pfizer or Moderna vaccine), or a second dose of any of the three COVID-19 vaccines available in England during the study period: 14, 11 and 97 estimated additional cases of myocarditis for every one million men vaccinated, respectively for the ChAdOx1, the Pfizer-BioNTech or the Moderna vaccine.
The increased risk of developing myocarditis among males younger than age 40 was also higher after receiving two doses of the Moderna vaccine when compared to the risk of myocarditis after COVID-19 infection.
The researchers noted, however, the average age of people who received the Moderna vaccine was 32 years, compared to the majority of those who received the other vaccines were older than age 40.
In men ages 40 and older, a slightly increased risk of myocarditis was found after a booster dose of either of the two mRNA vaccines (Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna): 3 estimated extra cases of myocarditis for every one million men vaccinated with either mRNA vaccine.
Risk of COVID-19 infection-associated myocarditis among men:
Among men younger than age 40, the risk of infection-associated myocarditis was higher compared to the risk of vaccine-associated myocarditis: 16 extra cases associated with having infection before vaccination, with the only exception of a second dose of Moderna vaccine.
Among men older than age 40, the risk of infection-associated myocarditis was higher compared to the risk of vaccine-associated myocarditis: 85 extra cases associated with having infection before vaccination.
“It is important for the public to understand that myocarditis is rare, and the risk of developing myocarditis after a COVID-19 vaccine is also rare.
This risk should be balanced against the benefits of the COVID-19 vaccines in preventing severe COVID-19 infection.
It is also crucial to understand who is at a higher risk for myocarditis and which vaccine type is associated with increased myocarditis risk, ” said Professor Nicholas Mills, Ph.D., the Butler British Heart Foundation Chair of Cardiology at the University of Edinburgh and a co-author of the paper.
“These findings are valuable to help inform recommendations on the type of COVID-19 vaccines available for younger people and may also help shape public health policy and strategy for COVID-19 vaccine boosters.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus continues to shift, and more contagious variants arise; our hope is that this data may enable a more well-informed discussion on the risk of vaccine-associated myocarditis when considered in contrast to the net benefits of COVID-19 vaccination,” said another co-author Julia Hippisley-Cox, F.R.C.P., professor of clinical epidemiology and general practice at the University of Oxford.
Authors noted there are two unanswered questions that likely require further investigation.
The first is about myocarditis risk among children ages 13-17 because there were too few cases of myocarditis to quantify the risk specific to this age group.
Secondly, researchers were not able to directly compare the death rate after COVID-19 infection vs. death after COVID-19 vaccination since the database only included people who had received at least one COVID-19 vaccine.
More expansive data and a different analysis are still needed to address these questions and numerous other COVID-19 topics.
The study has two notable limitations.
The number of cases of myocarditis among individuals who received a booster dose of the ChAdOx1 or Moderna vaccines was too small to calculate the risk of myocarditis.
Additionally, researchers cannot exclude the possibility of over- or under-estimated risk due to misclassification of any health information in the database, though the U.K.’s National Health Service is known to provide timely and accurate data.
Additional co-authors are Xue W. Mei, Ph.D.; Lahiru Handunnetthi, Ph.D.; Sharon Dixon, M.R.G.C.P.; Francesco Zaccardi, Ph.D.; Manu Shankar-Hari, Ph.D.; Peter Watkinson, M.D.; Kamlesh Khunti, F.R.G.C.P.; Anthony Harden, Ph.D.; Carol A.C. Coupland, Ph.D.; Keith M. Channon, M.D., F.R.C.P.; and Aziz Sheikh, M.D. Authors’ disclosures are listed in the manuscript.
The study received funding from an HDR-UK Research and Innovation grant, as well as support from the University of Oxford’s COVID-19 Research Response Fund.
Studies published in the American Heart Association’s scientific journals are peer-reviewed.
The statements and conclusions in each manuscript and do not necessarily reflect the Association’s policy or position.
The Association makes no representation or guarantee as to their accuracy or reliability.
The Association receives funding primarily from individuals; foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific Association programs and events.
The Association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content.
Revenues from pharmaceutical and biotech companies, device manufacturers and health insurance providers and the Association’s overall financial information are available here.
Additional Resources:
About the American Heart Association
The American Heart Association is a relentless force for a world of longer, healthier lives.
We are dedicated to ensuring equitable health in all communities.
Through collaboration with numerous organizations, and powered by millions of volunteers, we fund innovative research, advocate for the public's health and share lifesaving resources.
The Dallas-based organization has been a leading source of health information for nearly a century.
Connect with us on heart.org , Facebook , Twitter or by calling 1-800-AHA-USA1.
###
For Media Inquiries and AHA/ASA Expert Perspective: 214-706-1173
Michelle Kirkwood: 703-457-7838; michelle.kirkwood@heart.org
For Public Inquiries: 1-800-AHA-USA1 (242-8721)
heart.org and stroke.org
On August 11, 2022, the U.S. CDC changed their recommendations for how people can stay safe during COVID-19.
For years now, what we have had to do to stay safe has changed as we learned more about the pandemic.
This change is just making sure that people have the latest information on what they should do.
The updated recommendations do not mean that COVID-19 is over.
COVID-19 is still making hundreds of Philadelphians sick every day, and people all across the country are still dying from this disease.
There are things you can do to protect yourself, your loved ones, and your community from severe COVID-19.
Vaccines
The most important thing that you can do to protect yourself from severe COVID-19, hospitalization and death is to be up-to-date on your COVID-19 vaccines.
You can find the closest vaccine location on the Health Department’s website.
Masks
The Health Department strongly recommends that Philadelphians wear a face mask if they are around others in indoor public spaces.
N-95 and KN-95 masks provide the best protection.
Wearing a paper, surgical mask under a cloth mask is almost as protective as an N-95 mask.
Paper, surgical masks offer lower protection.
Just wearing a cloth mask is no longer recommended.
Wearing a mask is especially important for people who are at high risk for severe COVID-19.
Keep an eye on the CDC Community Level to help gauge your risk of being exposed to COVID-19.
When the risk or high or medium, the Health Department will strongly recommend that people wear masks.
Masks are also important if you have been exposed to COVID-19.
Instead of quarantining, people should wear a high-quality mask for ten days if they have been around someone who has COVID-19.
If you test positive for COVID-19, you should stay at home away from others for five days and continue to wear a high-quality mask for five additional days.
If you have been exposed to COVID-19
If you have been around someone who has confirmed COVID-19, you should wear a mask for ten days.
After five days, take a COVID-19 test.
You can learn more about where to get tested on the Health Department’s website.
If you test negative, continue to wear a high-quality mask for five additional days.
If you are feeling symptoms of COVID-19
If you are feeling sick with symptoms of COVID-19 like sore throat, cough, or fever, you should take a COVID-19 test.
You can learn more about where to get tested on the Health Department’s website.
If your test comes back negative but you are still sick, take another test at least 48 hours later and, continue to wear a high-quality mask for five additional days.
If you test positive for COVID-19
If you test positive, you should start isolating immediately.
This means that you should stay at home and away from others for at least five days.
Wear a high-quality mask around others in your home.
After five days, if you feel better and have no symptoms, you can stop isolating, but still should wear a high-quality mask for five additional days.
If you can take a test after testing positive, take it after five days.
Once you have two consecutive negative tests at least 48 hours apart, you can stop wearing a mask and isolating.
If your symptoms come back at any point, start isolating again.
You can also use tests to decide when to stop masking.
If you are feeling better and fever free on day 6 take a test, then take another one 48 hours later.
If both are negative, you can stop wearing a mask.
If you are at high-risk for severe COVID-19, because you are older, overweight, or have chronic conditions that may make the sickness worse, contact your healthcare provider to learn about free treatment options.
If you don’t have a healthcare provider, you can visit any of the Test to Treat locations to get access to treatment.
You should also stay away from people more likely to have severe illness if they get COVID-19 during that time.
Urban consumers drove less during the COVID-19 pandemic
The average annual spending on gasoline decreased 24.8 percent in urban areas and 18.8 percent in rural areas.
Even though spending on gas decreased, this does not mean the amount of gas purchased decreased.
To calculate the amount of gas purchased, we must consider the average price per gallon of gasoline.
Data from the Consumer Price Index (CPI) show the average price per gallon of gasoline was $2.70 in 2019 and $2.24 in 2020.
We can then estimate the quantity of gas purchased by dividing the amount spent by the price per gallon.
Using this approach, we estimate that the average consumer unit in urban areas reduced their gas purchases by 67 gallons, or 9.5 percent, from 2019 to 2020.
This suggests that urban consumers drove less during the pandemic.
While this method is suitable for urban areas, it does not apply to rural areas because the CPI data only cover the population in urban areas.
However, if we apply this method to rural areas, rural gas purchases fell roughly 17 gallons, or 2.2 percent, from 2019 to 2020.
Despite the limitations of the rural calculation, it is still reasonable to assume that both urban and rural consumers used less gasoline in 2020 than in 2019, with urban areas having a larger decrease.
This may be explained by the easier accessibility of stores in urban areas than in rural areas.
How do young people overcome different learning gaps left by the Covid-19 pandemic?
What are some robust supports, including mentoring and apprenticeship programs, available to them in the wake of the pandemic?
And how can they decide between taking a job now versus the potential of earning higher wages later, after receiving a college degree?
These were some of the more compelling questions identified and discussed at the Fed Listens event, Joining the Labor Force After Covid—A Discussion on Youth Employment, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago on August 22, 2023.
Attendees heard the perspectives of Chicago Fed President and CEO Austan Goolsbee and Federal Reserve Governor Michelle Bowman.
But most of the event was devoted to a panel made up of a recent graduate of the Chicago Public Schools and workforce development leaders from across the Chicago Fed’s Midwest region.
Among those leaders were an Iowa community college president and a Milwaukee construction apprenticeship coordinator.
Focusing on youth who had to navigate the disruptive experience of being in high school or college during the pandemic, the event also included panelists who have been leading workforce development initiatives for young people aged 16–24 in Detroit and Indianapolis.
(The panelist’s names and bios, plus the agenda, are below.)
One theme that several speakers highlighted was the importance of providing supports and resources for young people to succeed today.
Panelist Jose Luevano, construction readiness coordinator at Wisconsin Regional Training Partnership|Big Step said, “As far as what pushes students to get their career started, I would say [it] is just having somebody there for you.”
The transcript and video replay, plus links to the text of Goolsbee’s and Bowman’s opening remarks, follow.
Opening remarks by President Austan Goolsbee Opening remarks delivered by Austan D. Goolsbee, president and chief executive officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, at the Fed Listens event held at the Bank on August 22, 2023.
Download Remarks
Welcoming remarks by Governor Michelle Bowman Welcoming remarks delivered by Governor Michelle W. Bowman, of the Federal Reserve System Board of Governors, at the Fed Listens event hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago on August 22, 2023.
Download Remarks
Fed Listens is a Federal Reserve System initiative that began in 2019 as a way to hear about how monetary policy affects peoples’ daily lives and livelihoods.
Since 2021, these sessions have focused on listening to diverse perspectives on how communities were impacted by and are recovering from the Covid-19 pandemic.
(Washington, D.C., April 18, 2023) – U.S. Senator Roger Marshall, M.D. appeared on Mornings with Maria to discuss the new bombshell report he released last night on the origins of COVID-19.
Senator Marshall also responded to yesterday’s report of two individuals accused of operating a Chinese Communist Party-affiliated surveillance station in New York City, and his legislation to crackdown on CCP agents spying on individuals on U.S. soil.
You may click HERE or on the image below to watch the full interview.
Highlights from his interview include:
On two possible 2019 lab accidents at the Wuhan Institute of Virology:
“The preponderance of evidence shows there were two lab leaks, the first one occurring probably somewhere around September timeframe in a Wuhan laboratory, an unintentional lab leak sometime in September of 2019.
The Chinese then began vaccine research, and we think that is when this epidemic, which became a pandemic, actually exploded.
“Most likely, they were developing this vaccine in a laboratory in the Wuhan University working on primates.
We think that’s when some type of an aerosol was accidentally released from that laboratory, or a worker walked out with this very, very contagious virus.”
“Right, Maria, I think we had a scale in front of us and we put all the evidence on one side that supports a natural spillover and the other on the lab origin of this, I think 95% of this is on the lab origin.”
“The epidemiology of this virus, the phylogenetic process we got through point towards this as well.
This virus was just too perfect, when it came out of that laboratory it was too perfect, it fit like a key into a lock into human lung cells.
Additionally, it had a segment called a furin cleavage site, it had another spot that looks like a sliced it out of HIV virus put that right to the furin cleavage site.
It’s just too perfect of a virus.”
On the Chinese Communist Party’s and U.S. Federal Agencies’ lack of transparency regarding the origins of the coronavirus:
“The Chinese have had their chance.
The CCP has had their chance to tell us, to show us.
They still won’t show us the DNA lab bank that Dr. Shi put down as well.
They continue to be complicit in this.”
“We need to look at ourselves as well and think about all the mistakes that we’ve made.
Why did the NIH continue to hide information from us?
As well as the other government agencies – USAID, The Department of Defense, both continue to hide information from us and doesn’t let us see the truth as well.
We need to learn from this mistake.
We don’t want this to ever happen again.
“Every one of your listeners has been impacted by this virus in one way or another
and we still don’t know how it happened or where it came from.
And perfectly, no 100%, we certainly think the evidence points towards a lab leak, an unintentional lab leak and they made that virus right there in Wuhan.”
On CCP police stations in the U.S.:
“Certainly, Maria, the CCP is attacking America on the air, land, and the sea like you described.
I do remember you talking about this months ago, that’s one of the reasons that we dropped legislation at the end of the work period several weeks ago, which would set up a 1-800 number to contact the FBI about this.”
“It’s absolutely true, these folks are out there basically operating like spies and there will be more to come on this and it’s in your backyard.”
###
The primary objective of this study was to determine whether the DNAm profiles of different groups of COVID-19 patients (severe and mild) differed from those of control individuals eight to twelve weeks after infection with SARS-CoV-2.
A secondary objective was to investigate whether the DNAm profiles of individuals with long-COVID differed from those in remission.
Overall, only the comparison between the COVID-19 positive and COVID-19 negative individuals revealed differentially methylated CpGs at FDR < 0.05 (specifically, cg22399236, cg03607951, and cg09829636).
The analyses of COVID-19 severity and long-COVID did not identify any CpGs with significantly different methylation levels.
The comparison between the COVID-19 positive and COVID-19 negative individuals revealed three differentially methylated CpGs at FDR < 0.05 (cg22399236, cg03607951, and cg09829636).
A search of these CpGs in the EWAS atlas27 showed multiple entries linking hypomethylation of cg03607951 in IFI44L to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)28, primary Sjögren’s syndrome29, mixed connective tissue disease30, and multiple other autoimmune disorders31.
By contrast, there were no entries for cg22399236 and cg09829636 in the EWAS atlas.
Further, a search in the online mQTL database showed several trans mQTLs associated with cg03607951 and cg09829636, but no cis or trans mQTLs associated with cg22399236. Trans mQTLs are known to be more polygenic than cis mQTLs and to explain less of the trait variance than cis mQTLs32.
More studies are needed to elucidate how these trans mQTLs affect methylation levels at the two CpGs in relation to COVID-19.
IFI44L plays an important role in interferon-induced innate viral response and protection against disease.
It has targeted antiviral specificity to several viral species33.
Such a function is not surprising given that IFI44L is a paralog of IFI44, a key gene involved in the induction of type I and type III interferon signaling34,35.
However, a recent study showed that inhibition of IFI44L impairs the replication of several viruses, while the expression of IFI44L impairs antiviral response34.
Based on these findings, it is interesting to note that a recent transcriptomics study concluded that asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection might be due to decreased expression of six genes, one of which was IFI44L36.
Another transcriptomics study of myocardial tissue from SARS-CoV-2-positive autopsy cases revealed an upregulation of two interferon-related genes (IFIT3 and IFI44L) among those with cardiac involvement37.
Transcriptome data from human bronchial epithelial cells during SARS-CoV-2 infection have also identified IFI44L as one of the top genes upregulated in severe COVID-1938,39.
Collectively, the above studies indicate that downregulation of IFI44L early in the disease course may be a beneficial physiologic response to control SARS-CoV-2 infection and that it may be associated with a positive outcome.
We did not find any methylation differences between severe and mild COVID-19 three months after the infection.
However, this may be because both the mild and severe group in our study consisted of outpatients who all survived.
Although nonsignificant, the severe COVID-19 group in our study did show a higher expression of IFI44L.
The observed hypomethylation of IFI44L three months after infection in our study could reflect that it takes time to reverse the immune responses induced by infection.
However, it could also reflect a physiological response to control the infection, as complete viral clearance may take months to achieve in some individuals40,41.
Another explanation is that it could indicate a possible link between COVID-19 and systemic autoimmune diseases.
Notably, Zhao et al.42 proposed that hypomethylation of the IFI44L promoter might be a reliable biomarker for the diagnosis of SLE.
Furthermore, SARS-CoV-2 has been shown to induce autoantibodies (e.g., antiphospholipid antibodies and transient lupus anticoagulant43,44) and trigger autoimmune responses such as hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and myocarditis44.
There are recent reports of SARS-CoV-2 infection preceding various autoimmune diseases, including SLE45,46.
Therefore, longitudinal data allowing an evaluation of the duration of the methylation changes post infection might enhance our understanding of possible long-term effects.
Besides cg03607951 in IFI44L, the comparison between COVID-19 positive and COVID-19 negative individuals identified a statistically significant CpG (cg09829636) in ‘ankyrin repeat domain 9’ (ANKRD9).
ANKRD9 is a highly conserved protein that modulates the intracellular properties of the cytosolic enzyme inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase 2 (IMPDH2) and facilitates its degradation47.
The link between ANKRD9 and IMPDH2 is compelling in light of the role of IMPDHs as therapeutic targets for COVID-19.
Specifically, the IMPDH inhibitor, Ribavirin (aka tribavirin), is an antiviral medication used for the treatment of COVID-1948.
Thus, hypomethylation of ANKRD9 in COVID-19 patients might reflect a physiologic response to control the infection.
The top GO pathways identified in our analyses, although nonsignificant at FDR < 0.05, suggest that IFI44L has a central role in viral response.
Indeed, cg03607951 in IFI44L seemed to be the sole contributor of the three significant CpGs in the GO pathways related to viral response.
Our top GO pathway (GO:0051607) “Defense response to virus” has also been reported in two other transcriptomic studies of COVID-19-infected humans and mammals49,50.
Our analysis comparing the long-COVID group to the remission group did not identify any significant methylation differences.
The lack of significant findings may be real or reflect the small sample size available for this comparison.
The proportion of patients evaluated to have long-term symptoms was similar to the numbers reported in previous studies (38% vs 33% and 40%)1,2,51.
To our knowledge, the current study is the only EWAS of post-COVID-19 and long-COVID patients.
Other EWASs of COVID-19 in the literature include those by Castro de Moura et al.20, Balnis et al.22, Zhou et al.52 and a multi-omics study by Bernardes et al.53.
These studies examined DNAm changes early in the disease course, i.e., during the ongoing infection when the immune system is highly activated and found distinct patterns correlating with disease severity.
Castro de Moura et al. included data on mild and severe COVID-19 cases without underlying conditions, and their DNAm data were also generated on the Illumina EPIC platform.
Consistent with our findings, Castro de Moura et al. also found hypomethylation of IFI44L among their top ten genes associated with severe COVID-19 early in the disease course.
They concluded that the methylation changes were likely due to innate susceptibility rather than changes induced by the virus itself.
Apart from IFI44L, we had no other overlapping findings with the study by Castro de Moura et al.
This may be due to differences in study populations (we only had seven patients in need of ventilator support).
It could also be that the methylation signals at the other loci were transient and were reversed three months after infection.
Balnis et al.22 also had data on COVID-19 positive and COVID-19 negative individuals, and like the above-mentioned study by Castro de Moura et al.20, their DNAm data were also generated on the Illumina EPIC platform.
Despite these similarities, Balnis et al. did not detect any global mean methylation differences between the two groups of participants.
Again, this could be due to differences in the study populations (the controls in Balnis et al. were an intensive care population).
The authors did, however, detect DMRs in another interferon-induced gene, ‘interferon alpha inducible protein 27’ (IFI27), as well as in ‘2′-5′-oligoadenylate synthetase 2’ (OAS2) which is a member of the 2–5
A synthetase family known to be involved in the innate immune response to viral infection.
The results of their gene ontology and pathway enrichment analysis were also congruent with ours, pointing to host-defense responses and terms such as ‘response to type I interferon’ and ‘response to virus’, among others.
Despite limited sample sizes (n = 21 and n = 13), the studies by Zhou et al.52 and Bernardes et al.53 reported significant methylation changes between mild and severe COVID-19.
Zhou et al. reported the downregulation of four genes, in particular “G Protein Subunit Gamma 7” (GNG7) and “Guanine nucleotide binding protein” (GNAS), among patients with severe disease.
Likewise, the longitudinally combined transcriptomic and methylation analysis by Bernardes et al. revealed the downregulation of GNG7 and GNAS2 in severe COVID-19.
However, neither study detected methylation changes related to IFI44L or ANKRD9.
The epigenome-wide investigations described above collectively point to innate response to viral infection via interferon-inducible proteins as a possible mechanism for COVID-19 disease progression.
In support, our gene-enrichment pathway analysis revealed enrichment of GO terms that were specific for defense responses to viral infection.
Although we did not collect peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), Su et al. did not find any link to IFI44L when examining RNA expression in samples taken three months after SARS-CoV-2 infection in subjects with long-COVID54.
Although there have been reports of EAA in severe COVID-1921, we did not find any differences in EAA in our study.
Interestingly, Cao et al.55 found a dynamic increasing EAA in the initial phases of COVID-19, while this increase was partly reversed in the convalescent phase, indicating that the infection might accelerate epigenetic aging.
Another study by Mongelli et al.56 reported increased EAA in younger but not older COVID-19 survivors.
More studies are needed to determine the association between EAA and SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Strengths and limitations of the study
Only a few studies have reported blood-based DNAm in COVID-19, and, to our knowledge, there are no prior reports comparing differentially methylated CpGs three months after SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Our study also includes data from confirmatory serology tests performed on all participants, including those with long-COVID, which helps to minimize false positives/negatives.
Our study is also based on prospective follow-up questionnaires with high response rates, enabling detailed longitudinal assessments.
Our study also has a few limitations.
The evaluation of disease severity was based on self-reported symptoms, and not on an objective assessment.
It is difficult to gauge the extent to which recall bias and other types of misclassifications might have influenced the results presented here.
The evaluation of long-COVID using the RAND 36-item health survey questionnaire is known to have high sensitivity; however, specificity may be low.
Notably, 12% of the Norwegian population reported that their health had, in general, worsened compared to the preceding year.
At the same time, the population included in the current study was apparently healthier than the general population.
For instance, in the first wave of the pandemic, the COVID-19 positive individuals reported higher physical fitness and socioeconomic status, which is also reflected in our control group where only 4% of the participants reported worse health compared to a year before.
Additionally, the evaluation of long-COVID versus remission was likely affected by the small sample size.
In addition, we were unable to explore the expression of IFI44L and ANRKD9 in PBMCs, as extracting these cells from whole blood after freezing is not feasible.
The study setup we had at the time of recruitment did not allow for repeated measurements on the same patients both in the acute phase of infection and after three months, which would have provided relevant longitudinal information rather than a single “snapshot” of disease progression.
In conclusion, our study adds to the growing knowledgebase regarding epigenetic contributions to COVID-19.
It confirmed previously reported associations with IFI44L and the involvement of interferon-responsive genes in the underlying pathophysiology of COVID-19 and showed that such signals can be identified months after the infection.
We identified a novel link to ANKRD9, which is noteworthy given that IMPDH inhibitors are used in the treatment of COVID-19.
This and the other genes identified here would need to be replicated in other EWASs before being dismissed as false positives.
We have thus provided all the results of our main EWASs, so that other researchers would be able to easily compare their results to ours.
Main findings
Just over a third (35%) of adults in England who responded to the survey reported having a need for dental treatment or advice between March 2020 and March 2021, when access to dental services was limited because of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
The most common reasons for needing treatment or advice were because of a broken or decayed tooth (36%) or toothache or mouth pain (31%).
Around a quarter of participants reported that they did not have a problem but wanted a check-up (24%).
Two thirds of survey participants (68%) who needed advice contacted their usual dental practice.
Less than 1 in 10 tried other approaches, for example contacting a new practice, searching the internet or social media or dialling 111.
One in 6 (16%) of them did not seek any advice or treatment.
The most common outcome for those who had sought treatment or advice was that the problem was completely treated by a dental professional (48%).
One in 10 (10%) did not receive any advice or treatment.
The most common reasons for not seeking help were that participants were worried about catching COVID-19 or were shielding (23% of those who did not seek help), or because they could not afford to pay for treatment or advice (13%).
Introduction
Background
On 25 March 2020 access to general dental services was paused across the UK and dental care hubs were established to deliver urgent care as part of the government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic.[footnote 1] Personal protective equipment ( PPE ), infection prevention and control, and patient prioritisation guidance were issued to dental care providers[footnote 2] as services began to reopen in England from June 2020.
This guidance further changed as the nation continued to navigate the pandemic and as wider restrictions were amended.
Although some access to dental services was maintained throughout subsequent lockdowns and changes in restrictions, there were longer-term impacts on access to dental services.
These included the time needed to clear appointment backlogs, staff availability, physical distancing and PPE requirements[footnote 3], some of which still applied in February and March 2021, when the Adult Oral Health Survey ( AOHS ) was carried out.
About the survey
The 2021 AOHS was commissioned by Public Health England, now the Office for Health Improvement and Disparities.
The survey was carried out by a consortium led by the National Centre for Social Research (NatCen), and includes the University of Birmingham, King’s College London, the School of Dental Sciences at Newcastle University, the Dental Public Health Group and Department of Epidemiology and Public Health at University College London (UCL), and the Office for National Statistics ( ONS ).
The University of Leeds and School of Clinical Dentistry, University of Sheffield also provided guidance and support to the survey and its design.
The survey was designed as a continuation of the long-running Adult Dental Health Surveys, carried out in the United Kingdom since 1968.
The last Adult Dental Health Survey report was in 2009 and was published by NHS Digital.
The 2021 survey differed from its predecessors in a number of ways:
it was carried out using web and paper self-completion questionnaires, rather than by face-to-face interviewing in respondents’ homes
it was not possible to carry out dental examinations of participants
the survey covered England only, rather than other nations of the UK
the name of the survey was changed to reflect its focus on the health of teeth and mouths
The survey was carried out in February and March 2021 with a representative sample of adults in England aged 16 and over.
A sample of 19,286 addresses was selected using probability methods, and 2 adults per household were invited to take part in the survey.
A total of 6,343 responses were received from 4,429 households, 24% of the eligible addresses in the sample.
Within participating households, 76% of eligible individuals took part.
For further information on the survey response, see the accompanying technical report.
Data was collected using self-completion questionnaires, completed in web and paper form.
The survey questionnaire covered self-assessed dental health, oral health behaviours, service use, barriers to care and impacts of oral and dental health.
It included a set of questions designed to explore the impact of COVID-19 on oral health and access to care.
This report presents the results of those questions, including analysis to explore variations in need for and access to treatment or advice among different groups in the population.
Where differences are commented on in the text, these are significant at the 95% confidence level, unless otherwise stated.
Disclosure control was applied and therefore no results are shown where the base was fewer than 50 responses.
The AOHS findings are based on participants’ responses at a particular point in time and it is not possible to make inferences about causal relationships.
For example, those who reported their oral health as bad or very bad were most likely to report that they had suffered a broken or decayed tooth, or toothache or pain.
It is not possible to say whether these problems were elements within a long-term experience of poor oral health or whether the assessment of poor oral health was specifically made in reference to those symptoms.
Full technical information about the 2021 AOHS is provided in the accompanying technical report.
This report only applies to England.
For Scotland, see the Scottish Adult Oral Health Survey 2016 to 2018.
Need for dental treatment or advice
Survey participants were asked “Have you needed dental advice or treatment since the start of the first COVID-19 lockdown (in March 2020)?”.
Those who reported that they had such a need were asked what type of problem they had and were offered a list of 6 types of problem, as well as the option that they did not have a problem but wanted a dental check-up.
Who needed treatment or advice
Just over a third (35%) of participants reported that they needed dental advice or treatment at some point between the start of the first lockdown in March 2020 and the time of interview (between February and March 2021).
Gender
Women were more likely than men to have needed treatment or advice: 37% of women, compared with 33% of men.
Age
The need for dental treatment or advice increased with age, from 22% of those aged 16 to 24 years to 45% of those aged 75 years and over.
Figure 1: need for dental treatment or advice by age
Base: all adults.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval around the estimates.
Source: Table 1 in the data tables.
Self-assessed oral health
More than half (56%) of adults who reported that their oral health was bad or very bad felt that they needed treatment or advice, compared with 42% of those with fair oral health and 30% of those who reported that their oral health was good or very good.
Figure 2: need for dental treatment or advice by self-assessed oral health
Base: all adults.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval around the estimates.
Source: Table 2 in the data tables.
Usual pattern of dental attendance
Adults who usually visited the dentist for a regular check-up (39%) were more likely to say they had needed treatment or advice than those who visited only when they were having trouble (31%), for the occasional check-up (26%) or those who had never been to the dentist (17%).
Perceptions of the need for treatment or advice may have been influenced by participants’ normal pattern of dental attendance.
Variations by household income and neighbourhood deprivation showed no clear pattern.
Figure 3: need for dental treatment or advice by usual pattern of dental attendance
Base: all adults.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval around the estimates.
Source: Table 2 in the data tables.
What treatment or advice was needed
The following analysis is based on participants who felt they needed treatment or advice.
They could give one or more reasons for this need.
The most common reason was because of a broken or decayed tooth (36% of those who needed help), followed by toothache or pain in the mouth (31%).
Around a quarter of participants reported that they did not have a problem but wanted a check-up (24%).
Figure 4: what treatment or advice was needed
Base: adults who needed treatment or advice.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval around the estimates.
Source: Table 3 in the data tables.
There were some differences across groups in the reasons people gave for needing treatment or advice.
Other differences were not statistically significant.
Gender
Men were more likely than women to have reported a decayed or broken tooth as their reason for needing treatment or advice (40% of men, compared with 33% of women).
Age
Needing treatment or advice because of toothache or pain in the mouth was more common among adults aged between 25 and 34 (42%), and declined thereafter with age, being lowest among those aged 65 and over (22% of those aged 65 to 74, 21% of those aged 75 and over).
Household income
Equivalised household income takes into account the number of adults and dependent children in the household, as well as overall household income.
Households are divided into quintiles (fifths) based on this measure.
The proportion of adults who needed help due to toothache or pain increased from 27% among those in the fifth of households with the highest incomes to 40% among those in the lowest income quintile.
Adults in the 2 highest income quintiles were more likely to report that they did not have a problem but wanted a check-up (30% in each quintile) than those in the lower income quintiles.
This proportion was lowest (17%) among those in the lowest income quintile.
Neighbourhood deprivation
Neighbourhood deprivation is measured using the English Index of Multiple Deprivation ( IMD ).
IMD is based on 37 indicators, across 7 domains of deprivation.
IMD is a measure of the overall deprivation experienced by people living in a neighbourhood, although not everyone who lives in a deprived neighbourhood will be deprived themselves.
To enable comparisons, areas are classified into quintiles (fifths).
The proportions reporting broken or decayed teeth was lower in the least deprived fifth of neighbourhoods (30%) than in other areas (between 36% and 40%).
There was a similar and more pronounced pattern for those reporting toothache or other oral pain, from 24% and 25% of those in the 2 least deprived neighbourhoods to 41% of those in the most deprived fifth of neighbourhoods.
Conversely, the proportion who reported that they wanted a check-up increased from 15% of those living in in the most deprived IMD quintile to 30% of those living in the least deprived quintile.
Figure 5: reason for needing dental treatment or advice by neighbourhood deprivation
Base: adults who needed treatment or advice.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval around the estimates.
Source: Table 3 in the data tables.
Self-assessed oral health
The survey captured participants’ views at a particular moment, and it is not possible to conclude whether their assessment of their dental health at the time of the survey preceded or was caused by the problems with their teeth or mouth during the previous year.
Those who assessed their oral health as bad or very bad were more likely than those with better oral health to have reported problems.
More than half (57%) of those with bad or very bad oral health reported a broken or decayed tooth, compared with 42% of those with fair oral health and 28% of those with good or very good oral health.
Toothache or pain was reported by half of those with bad or very bad oral health (47%), compared with 40% of those with fair oral health and 23% of those with good or very good oral health.
A third (32%) of those with good or very good oral health had no problem but wanted a check-up, compared with 16% of those who judged their oral health to be fair and 6% of those with bad or very bad oral health to.
Figure 6: reason for needing dental treatment or advice by self-assessed oral health
Base: adults who needed treatment or advice.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval around the estimates.
Source: Table 4 in the data tables.
Usual pattern of dental attendance
Those who usually only visited a dentist when they had trouble were more likely to report needing treatment or advice because of broken or decayed teeth (45%), compared with those who went for regular or occasional check-ups (34% and 33% respectively).
Needing treatment or advice because of toothache or other pain followed a similar pattern (reported by 53% of those who only went with trouble, 38% of those who went for occasional check-ups and 25% of those who usually went for regular check-ups).
Conversely, 29% of adults who usually went to the dentist for regular check-ups reported that they had wanted a check-up, compared with 18% of those who went for occasional check-ups and 6% of those who usually only visited a dentist when they had trouble.
Figure 7: reason for needing dental treatment or advice by usual pattern of dental attendance
Base: adults who needed treatment or advice.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval around the estimates.
Source: Table 4 in the data tables.
Sources of treatment or advice
Those who had needed dental treatment or advice between March 2020 and March 2021 were asked what action they took.
Two thirds (68%) of those who needed treatment or advice between March 2020 and March 2021 contacted their usual dental practice.
This is the proportion of all adults who answered this question and does not take into account whether all adults had a dental practice that they usually attended.
Smaller proportions of participants did other things: 10% contacted a new dental practice, 8% searched for dental advice on the internet or social media and 6% contacted 111 for help and advice.
(Calling 999 was offered as an option; no participants reported this.)
One in 6 (16%) did not seek any advice or treatment.
Figure 8: actions taken when dental treatment or advice was needed
Base: adults who needed treatment or advice.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval around the estimates.
Source: Table 5 in the data tables.
There were some differences across some groups in the proportions who contacted their usual dentist.
The proportions who did nothing also varied across some groups.
Age
Older adults who needed treatment or advice were more likely to contact their usual dental practice: this proportion was higher among those aged over 55 (between 77% and 79%), compared with 55% to 62% of adults aged under 45.
A quarter (24%) of those aged 35 to 44 who needed treatment or advice did not seek any help, compared with between 13% and 17% of those in younger or older age groups.
Figure 9: contacted usual dental practice for dental treatment or advice by age
Base: adults who needed treatment or advice.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval around the estimates.
Source: Table 5 in the data tables.
Neighbourhood deprivation
The proportion of participants who contacted their usual dental practice when they needed treatment increased from 57% in the most deprived fifth of areas to 78% in the least deprived fifth of areas.
Figure 10: contacted usual dental practice for dental treatment or advice by neighbourhood deprivation
Base: adults who needed treatment or advice.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval around the estimates.
Source: Table 5 in the data tables.
Self-assessed oral health
The survey captured participants’ views at a particular moment, and it is not possible to conclude whether their assessment of their dental health at the time of the survey was influenced by how the problems with their teeth or mouth were dealt with.
Among those who had needed treatment and advice and who assessed their oral health as good or very good, 74% had contacted their usual dental practice, compared with 47% of those who rated their oral health as bad or very bad.
(This comparison does not take into account whether these survey participants had a dentist at the time.)
Figure 11: contacted usual dental practice for dental treatment or advice by self-assessed oral health
Base: adults who needed treatment or advice.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval around the estimates.
Source: Table 6 in the data tables.
The proportion who had not done anything about their need for treatment or advice increased from 13% of those with good or very good oral health to 24% of those with bad or very bad oral health.
Usual pattern of dental attendance
Adults who reported going for regular check-ups were most likely to have contacted their usual practice when they needed treatment or advice.
78% did so, compared with 54% of those who went for occasional check-ups and 46% of those who only went to the dentist when they had trouble.
Outcomes of seeking treatment or advice
Those who had sought treatment or advice from any source were asked what happened.
The most common outcome was that the problem was completely treated by a dental professional (48%).
Smaller proportions of participants received temporary treatment from a dental professional (15%), advice on how to manage the problem on their own (15%) or a prescription for antibiotics (11%).
One in 10 (10%) received no professional treatment or advice.
Figure 12: outcomes when looked for dental treatment or advice
Base: adults who sought treatment or advice.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval around the estimates.
Source: Table 7 in the data tables.
These proportions were similar for those who contacted their usual dental practice.
Half (51%) reported having been completely treated by a dental professional, 15% received temporary treatment, 15% were given advice on how to manage the problem on their own, 11% received a prescription for antibiotics and 7% received no professional treatment or advice.
Among those who needed treatment for a broken or decayed tooth, 51% reported that they had been completely treated by a dental professional, 24% received temporary treatment, 16% were given advice on how to manage the problem on their own, 8% received a prescription for antibiotics and 13% received no professional treatment or advice.
Among those who reported toothache or other pain, 43% reported having had complete professional treatment, 19% received temporary treatment, 23% were given advice on how to manage the problem on their own, 25% received a prescription for antibiotics and 11% received no professional treatment or advice.
The characteristics of those who needed treatment or advice varied according to the problem they had and the actions they took.
These will have influenced the outcomes of treatment, and consequently no comparisons of outcomes have been made across groups.
Reasons for not seeking treatment or advice
Among the 35% of survey participants who reported that they had needed advice or treatment, around 1 in 6 (16%) reported that they had not sought it.
These participants were asked why they had not looked for help.
Half of them either chose a reason other than those listed in the questionnaire (30%), didn’t know (3%) or preferred not to say (17%).
Among the options in the questionnaire, the most common reason for not seeking help was that participants were worried about catching COVID-19 or were shielding (23% of those who did not seek help).
Other reasons were that they could not afford to pay for treatment or advice (13%), the problem got better without help (9%), the participant did not know how to access treatment or advice (9%), they could not find a dentist who would treat them (7%), they could not travel to the dentist (5%) or they had COVID-19 (3%).
There was very little difference between different kinds of adults in the proportions who did not seek treatment or advice because they were worried about contracting COVID-19 or were shielding.
Those who described their oral health as good or very good were least likely to have avoided seeking help because of this (17%, compared with 31% of those with fair oral health and 28% of those with bad or very bad oral health).
The proportions of participants who did not seek help because they could not afford to pay for it varied with neighbourhood deprivation (from 3% in the least deprived quintile to 26% in the most derived quintile), household income (from 5% of those in the highest income quintile to 34% of those in the lowest income quintile) and with self-assessed dental health (from 4% of those with good or very good oral health to 34% of those with bad or very bad oral health).
CNN —
Covid-19 was never just another cold.
We knew it was going to stick around and keep changing to try to get the upper hand on our immune systems.
But we’ve changed, too.
Our B cells and T cells, keepers of our immune memories, aren’t as blind to this virus as they were when we first encountered the novel coronavirus in 2020.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has screened blood samples and estimates that 97% of people in the US have some immunity to Covid-19 through vaccination, infection or both.
Then there’s science: We have updated vaccines and good antivirals to lean on when cases start to rise.
Masks still work.
Rapid tests are in stores.
We now know to filter the air and to ventilate our spaces.
Those strategies, plus our hard-won immunity, had helped bring our national numbers of infections, hospitalizations and deaths down to levels that felt almost forgettable.
Almost.
Now that Covid-19 infections have started to rise again, it feels like people all over the country are testing positive, and it’s hard to know how to react.
The government has been dialing back its response since the end of the public health emergency in May.
Good Covid-19 data is hard to come by and harder to interpret.
So if people are less likely to be hospitalized or die from a Covid-19 infection now, has the danger passed?
Is there still reason to worry if you do catch the infection for a second, third or fourth time?
Experts say it’s less risky to catch Covid-19 than it used to be, but there are still good reasons not to treat it casually.
“At this point, the risk is lower because of our prior immunity, whether for severe outcomes or for long Covid,” said Dr. Megan Ranney, an emergency physician and dean of the Yale School of Public Health.
“Covid is still more dangerous than the flu, but its level of danger is becoming less,” she said, noting that we’re still very early in our human experience with the coronavirus, even four years in, and there are still things we don’t know.
“But for it to behave like other respiratory viruses in terms of seasonality and surges is entirely expected,” she added.
It would be “really weird” for Covid to disappear or for it not to cause illnesses, hospitalizations and deaths.
“It is still a virus,” Ranney said.
But a somewhat predictable waxing and waning of infections doesn’t make Covid-19 something to turn our backs on.
Our immune systems are better at spotting danger
After more than three grueling years, nearly all Americans have some immunity against Covid-19.
That means our immune systems – as long as they’re healthy and working as they should – will remember most forms of the coronavirus when it next comes our way.
That process takes some time to get going, however.
That lag may give the virus enough of a window to get a foothold in our nasal passages or lungs, and we get sick.
We may feel crummy for a few days, but then our B cells and T cells get their antibody production up and running.
Eventually, they shut the virus down, and we get better.
That’s what should happen.
But for many, their immune system just doesn’t kick in as quickly or as vigorously as it should.
Immune function drops off naturally with age.
About 1 in 4 Americans is over the age of 60, according to census data.
Then there are certain medications and health conditions that suppress immune function.
About 3% of the U.S. population – 7 million people – is severely immunocompromised, according to the National Institutes of Health.
This is a group taking medications to protect organ transplants or who are getting powerful drugs for cancer treatment, for example.
Then there’s individual variability.
Through genetic bad luck, some people may just be at higher risk of serious reactions to Covid-19 infections, and they probably wouldn’t know it.
Taken together, that’s a sizeable pool of people who benefit greatly from having antibodies at the ready to take on the coronavirus as fast as possible.
Vaccines get those antibodies in place and ready to work as soon as they’re needed.
Sometimes, people are so immunocompromised that vaccines can’t help them much, either.
They benefit from preventive shots containing Covid-fighting antibodies that are built to stick around the body for a few months.
Until this year, there was such a preventive product available, Evusheld.
But the virus has evolved so much that Evusheld lost its potency, and in January, the FDA revoked its authorization.
Since then, people who have very low immune function haven’t had anything to protect them from infection or severe disease.
But that could change.
The government announced this week that it’s funding the development of a new preventive antibody through the drug company Regeneron.
Trials of that drug are expected to start this fall, according to the US Department of Health and Human Services.
While nearly all of us have immune systems that can recognize key parts of the virus now, even that memory to the infection fades over time.
The longer it has been since you’ve been infected or vaccinated, the more forgetful your immune system becomes.
Those B cells and T cells, “they’re going to be a little slower to respond.
They’re not they’re not as primed and ready to go,” Ranney said.
Your strongest immunity will be in the two weeks to two months after you get your vaccines.
That means it’s smart to try to get your shots shortly before Covid is expected to be on the upswing.
Just like for flu, experts expect the worst of Covid to hit in the fall and winter.
CDC Director Dr. Mandy Cohen said that even though cases are going up now, most people will be better off waiting a few weeks to get the newly updated Covid-19 vaccines rather than trying to get one of the older bivalent vaccines right now.
But this is dependent on personal risk, so if you’re concerned, talk to your doctor or nurse practitioner about your options.
Risks from new variants
Variants are another reason people need to keep getting Covid vaccines.
The coronavirus evolves constantly.
Most of the time, its improvements are incremental.
In essence, it slips on a hat or fake mustache, but that’s not enough to completely disguise it from our immune system or our vaccines when it tries to break in.
Occasionally, it gets a makeover.
It has cut and dyed its hair, had plastic surgery and lost a ton of weight, so to speak.
These big changes make it unrecognizable to our immune system and sometimes to vaccines and drugs we use to fend it off.
That happened during the first wave of Omicron.
A virus emerged in South Africa and Botswana that was wholly different from the viruses in circulation but still caused Covid-19.
It quickly spread worldwide, infecting vaccinated and previously infected people alike.
Omicron caused a jaw-dropping 1 million infections a day in the United States in the winter of 2021.
Another virus like that has emerged on the world stage.
It’s called BA.2.86, and it has more than 30 amino acid changes to its spike protein, which makes it as genetically distant from its next closest ancestor – BA.2 – as the original Omicron variant was from the ancestral strain of the SARS-CoV-2 virus that emerged in 2019 in China.
Compared with the very first sequences of the virus that causes Covid-19, it has 58 changes to amino acids in its spike protein, according to Dr. Jesse Bloom, who studies the molecular structure of viruses at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center in Seattle.
It’s not clear exactly where BA.2.86 came from.
Scientists believe that the pattern of mutations it carries are characteristic of a virus that’s been changing inside the body of a chronically infected person.
Typically, these patients have diminished immune function so that they can’t completely clear the virus from their bodies, but they have enough immunity that it puts pressure on the virus to keep changing to survive.
Or it may have previously circulated in a part of the world with limited variant surveillance.
Scientists have spotted 13 human infections with this emerging variant have been confirmed from six countries: Israel, Denmark, the United Kingdom, the United States, Portugal and South Africa.
The status of the patients is not known in every case.
Of the cases for which information on the patients is available, one has been hospitalized, and none have died.
The people do not appear to have had contact with each other, and only one has traveled, indicating that the variant is present around the world and spreading in the community – though it is not known to what extent.
It has also been picked up at very low levels in wastewater in the US, Switzerland, Denmark and Thailand.
It is also not clear whether this virus will outcompete other circulating variants and grow to cause widespread infections.
Variant hunters around the world seem to have spotted it early.
Researchers are studying whether it will be able to evade immunity from past infection and vaccination.
More information should be available within a few weeks.
Unfortunately, the fact that the new coronavirus can morph this way means we’ll probably need to keep updating our vaccines and our immunity to keep pace.
The US government has launched Project NextGen, which aims to create longer-lasting and more variant-proof vaccines.
The first clinical trials of those new vaccines are expected to start this winter, HHS says.
Lasting risks like long Covid
Dr. Daniel Griffin, an infectious disease specialist at Columbia University, says people with Covid worry about three things: “ ‘Am I going to die?
Am I going to end up in the hospital?’
But for most people, it’s ‘Am I going to be sick and stay sick for many months?
Am I going to get long Covid?’ ”
“And for most people, actually, that’s the most significant risk.”
Experts noted that there isn’t a lot of good research on the risk of getting long Covid now.
Based on the science we do have, they say the risk of long-term complications appears to be going down.
There were fewer post-Covid conditions reported by patients after Omicron infections compared with those infected during the Delta wave, according to a recent study posted ahead of peer review.
But it seems the risk is not entirely gone.
Another recent study out of Australia, of nearly 23,000 people with confirmed Covid-19 infections between July and August 2022, found that 18% of the more than 11,000 who responded met the case definition for long Covid.
Researchers defined it as any new or continuing symptoms more than 90 days after a Covid-19 infection.
It was a highly vaccinated group, too.
More than 94% of people who responded to the survey had gotten at least three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine.
In this study, women, those between the ages of 50 and 69, people who lived in rural areas and those with fewer vaccine doses were more likely to report having long Covid.
The study was posted as a preprint ahead of peer review by outside experts.
Based on his experience treating long Covid patients, Griffin said that the percentage reported in the Australian paper seems high.
After people are vaccinated, their risk of getting long Covid drops from about 10% to 20% to the single digits, he said.
It goes down even further, he said, if they use antivirals like Paxlovid.
“The general principles are, the sicker you are, the more naive you are immunologically, the higher the chance of acute and chronic complications, and that’s kind of going by multiple studies showing that generally earlier in the pandemic, with the original variants, people had more acute and chronic complications,” said Dr. Peter Chin-Hong, an infectious disease specialist at the University of California at San Francisco.
Chin-Hong said recent studies do seem to show that the overall proportion of infections that result in problems like long Covid seems to be dropping over time.
“When you look at studies, long Covid is going down by one-half, and there have been multiple studies like in the UK, the US Census Bureau and all that stuff with the different variants” showing this, he said.
Risks from reinfection
It seems like there’s always a “but” with Covid-19, and here it is: Across the population, the risk of chronic complications from an infection may be going down, but each infection also adds to the chances that a person may face lasting damage.
A recent study published in the journal Nature Medicine found that reinfections are not benign.
Each additional infection increased a person’s risk of death, hospitalization and other long-term problems.
A recent National Institutes of Health-funded study that combed through millions of patient records to find people who had both first and second Covid-19 infections backs up those findings.
Among more than 300,000 people with reinfections, researchers found that the risk of having a more severe disease was slightly higher the second time around.
That research was also posted as a preprint ahead of peer review.
Study author Dr. Nathaniel Hendrix, a researcher and data scientist with the American Board of Family Medicine, said he set out to disprove the findings of the Nature Medicine study, which was based on an older group of mostly male patients treated through the Veterans Affairs health system.
Some critics felt this population couldn’t be representative of the larger US.
After He said he was surprised when his own study found that the risk of more severe illness did not drop at all for people getting Covid-19 a second time.
Hendrix said it’s made him think twice about taking precautions.
“I think it’s still worthwhile to do what you can to avoid getting infected,” he said.
Covid risks for kids
This overall reduction in post-Covid consequences for patients appears to apply to kids, too.
Earlier in the pandemic, pediatric infectious disease specialists were on the lookout for a rare complication of Covid-19 infection in kids called multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children, or MIS-C.
MIS-C starts two to six weeks after a Covid-19 infection.
It can cause an ongoing fever as well as more than one of the following symptoms: stomach pain, bloodshot eyes, diarrhea, dizziness, skin rash or vomiting, according to the CDC. MIS-C can be serious, but most kids get better with medical care.
A study published earlier this year found that for every 100 children hospitalized with Covid-19 in 2021, there were 17 MIS-C hospitalizations, and some cases were fatal.
Recent studies suggest that both the number and the severity of MIS-C cases has gone down globally over time.
Studies have shown that vaccination cuts the risk even further, by more than 90%.
“Now, the risk is about 6 percent with Omicron at least by one study, and so about half” of where it once was, Chin-Hong said.
Fortunately, the risk of long-term problems after Covid-19 has gone down, Griffin said, but for many, it hasn’t gone away.
He recently saw a young long Covid patient who started to cry because she’s been sick for more than two years, and she doesn’t seem to be getting better.
Covid still seems to be unique in its ability to cause extended illness this way.
Griffin says it’s possible for people who get influenza to get a problem known as long flu, but the proportion of people who wind up with that is about 1%.
With Covid, right now, Griffin thinks that number is at least 5%.
That’s a big enough risk that Dr. Kristin Englund, an infectious disease specialist at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio, says it shouldn’t be dismissed.
“Even a mild case of Covid may result in symptoms that last for weeks or four months or longer than that, so it is not something that I would take lightly,” she said.
How to stay safe
The pandemic was a kind of crash course in how to deal with contagious respiratory viruses.
Experts say the protective measures we adopted then should probably be part of how we live now.
It’s still important to break out masks in crowded, poorly ventilated spaces when infections are rampant and to use rapid tests when you get sick so you know whether you might need to take antivirals.
Everyone can benefit from vaccines and antivirals, but those are particularly important if you’re high risk: people over age 60, those who are pregnant, and those who have underlying health conditions or take medication that reduces their immunity.
Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.
“Those things haven’t changed in the past year,” Ranney said.
“It’s just that we all thought this was done.
And so now we’re having to re-remember what we did last fall to help manage the virus.”
Dr. Ellie Murray, an epidemiologist at the Boston University School of Public Health, says we should treat Covid at least as seriously as we do the flu: “not just chicken soup but time off, bed rest, fluids and reduced contact with others while sick, plus vaccination and good hygiene to prevent infection.”
Murray notes that we used to think that there was nothing more we could do about the flu and that the level of annual deaths was the lowest it was going to get.
The pandemic proved otherwise.
“We can have fewer flu deaths, and decreasing those is easier even than decreasing Covid deaths,” she said.
“So a better approach would be to treat both the flu and Covid as a new normal, which includes all the things we used to do for the flu but also adds in ventilation, masking, testing and treatment.
These additions will help reduce the burden of disease for both Covid and the flu.”
Media event date: 24 April 2023
Date published: 24 April 2023
Media type: Media release
Audience:
General public
The Australian Government will provide a further $50 million from the Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF) for research into post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC) – commonly known as Long COVID.
This is in addition to funding that has already been provided for research related to Long COVID, including more than $13 million from the MRFF, $1.6 million from the National Health and Medical Research Council, and $5 million to the Australian Partnership for Preparedness Research on Infectious Disease Emergencies.
This new funding will help improve our knowledge of Long COVID in the Australian context and generate evidence to inform policy and clinical guidance, improve health outcomes, and increase awareness of the condition in the community.
The first grant opportunity is expected to open in August 2023.
The Government is committed to supporting a strong healthcare system that will deliver effective patient-centred care for people diagnosed with this condition, and the best possible health and wellbeing outcomes for patients.
The funding comes as the final report from the House Standing Committee on Health, Aged Care and Sport's Inquiry into Long COVID and Repeated COVID Infections was tabled in the Australian Parliament today.
The committee, chaired by Dr Mike Freelander MP, made a number of recommendations in its final report, which was informed by more than 560 submissions and testimonies from a wide range of sources.
The Government thanks Dr Freelander and other committee members for their efforts in conducting the inquiry.
The Department of Health and Aged Care has been tasked with developing a national plan to respond to Long COVID, taking into consideration the committee’s findings.
Quotes attributable to Minister Butler:
“Long COVID is an emerging health issue, both in Australia and internationally.
“I thank Dr Freelander and his committee for conducting this important inquiry.
“The Australian Government will invest $50 million into research into Long COVID – as an initial response to the inquiry.
“I have tasked my department with developing a national plan to respond to Long COVID, taking into consideration the committee’s findings.”
Weather in your inbox
Your local forecast, plus daily trivia, stunning photos and our meteorologists’ top picks.
All in one place, every weekday morning.
Email
Forecast Location Info
Sign Up
By signing up, you're opting in to receive the Morning Brief email newsletter.
To manage your data, visit Data Rights.
Terms of Use | Privacy Policy
Please choose I'm not a medical professional.
Allergy and Immunology Anatomy Anesthesiology Cardiac/Thoracic/Vascular Surgery Cardiology Critical Care Dentistry Dermatology Diabetes and Endocrinology Emergency Medicine Epidemiology and Public Health Family Medicine Forensic Medicine Gastroenterology General Practice Genetics Geriatrics Health Policy Hematology HIV/AIDS Hospital-based Medicine
I'm not a medical professional.
Infectious Disease Integrative/Complementary Medicine Internal Medicine Internal Medicine-Pediatrics Medical Education and Simulation Medical Physics Medical Student Nephrology Neurological Surgery Neurology Nuclear Medicine Nutrition Obstetrics and Gynecology Occupational Health Oncology Ophthalmology Optometry Oral Medicine Orthopaedics Osteopathic Medicine Otolaryngology Pain Management Palliative Care Pathology Pediatrics Pediatric Surgery Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Plastic Surgery Podiatry Preventive Medicine Psychiatry Psychology Pulmonology Radiation Oncology Radiology Rheumatology Substance Use and Addiction Surgery Therapeutics Trauma Urology Miscellaneous
Cureus personal data will never be sold to third parties and will only be used to enrich the user experience and contact you in direct relation to the application.
I agree to opt in to this communication.
Millions of Americans may get smaller refunds when they file their taxes.
If you were banking on a hefty tax refund this year, think again.
The expiration of COVID-era tax breaks means millions of Americans may get smaller refunds when they file their tax returns for 2022, and those who received refunds in recent years, may now owe the government money.
"Stimulus payments are a thing of the past," Bankrate.com's senior industry financial analyst Ted Rossman tells ABC News.
"Last year, many people got an extra-large refund because they claimed a stimulus payment they didn't receive in 2021," he said.
According to the IRS, the average refund last year was nearly $3,200.
That was up from about $2,800 in 2021.
Tax experts say refund amounts this year will more likely resemble refunds from 2019 or 2020.
Depending on a taxpayer's situation, tax experts say refunds could shrink by a few hundred to a few thousand dollars.
Federal stimulus checks dry up
The biggest reason tax refunds may be smaller this year is because Congress did not hand out COVID-related federal stimulus checks in 2022.
While most taxpayers received their stimulus checks automatically, some got the money as a recovery rebate credit of $1,400 per person on their 2021 income tax return.
That means that for a family of four, that $5,600 credit won't be there on this year's tax return.
Paying taxes on state rebates/refunds
While federal stimulus may have gone away, over a dozen states issued taxpayer rebates and refunds last year.
Some states, including California, New Jersey and Massachusetts expect to finish handing out those checks in the first half of this year.
The Internal Revenue Service headquarters, in Washington, D.C., Jan. 10, 2023.
Mandel Ngan/AFP via Getty Images
While these payments don't count as taxable income on a state return, they will often count as taxable income on federal returns.
For example, about 3 million homeowners in New York state were automatically sent a property tax rebate of up to $1,050 in June.
The IRS may count that payment as income on federal returns.
No more expanded child tax credit
In 2021, Congress gave families a boost with the expanded child tax credit, which has since expired.
The child tax credit reverted back to $2,000 last year for children under age 17.
That's down from the previous year's enhanced child tax credit of $3,600 for children under age 6 and $3,000 for children under age 18.
Child and dependent care tax breaks
The American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 made the tax credit for child and dependent care expenses substantially more generous (up to $8,000 for two or more children), but that credit went back to the old limit of $2,100 for 2022.
Taxpayers who participate in their employer's pretax child and dependent care flexible spending accounts may also see lower refunds because contribution limits for those accounts were increased to a maximum $10,500 in 2021 but reverted to the previous limit of $5,000 last year.
There are still ways to maximize the existing, albeit smaller, child and dependent care credits.
"An especially good tip is that summer camps can count for the dependent care credit," said Rossman.
"Parents sometimes only think school-year care is eligible, but if your kids are in day camp while you're working, that can be fair game," he said.
"The Earned Income Tax Credit is extremely popular, especially among low- and medium-earners.
He added, "The American Opportunity Tax Credit and the Lifetime Learning Credit are good ones in the education space.
"
Charitable contribution deductions
Unlike last year, charitable donations are no longer giving most taxpayers a tax break.
Congress didn't extend the temporary tax break that allowed a special charitable deduction for taxpayers who take the standard deduction instead of itemizing.
The $300 deduction individuals could take ($600 for married couples), wasn't available for tax year 2022 and could result in a small increase in tax bills.
Quicker tax refunds
Tax day this year is April 18.
Even if you file for a six-month extension, you still need to pay any tax you expect to owe by April 18, otherwise, you can get hit with penalty and interest charges from the IRS.
If you expect a tax refund, Rossman says you can improve your chances of getting it quickly by filing early and electronically.
Opting to have your refund directly deposited into a checking or savings account can also speed up your return.
"Filing via paper really slows things down," said Rossman.
"Especially if you're anticipating a refund, aim to get your return in soon after the filing window opens in late January.
It's your money, after all.
Don't give the government an interest-free loan for any longer than you have to.
"
How to spend your tax refund
As for what to do with that refund once you get it?
While it may be tempting to use it towards a vacation or big-ticket purchase, like a television or car, Rossman says the most prudent thing to do is use at least some of the refund to pay down debt.
"The average credit card rate is a whopping 19.59%
so if you have credit card debt, using some or all of your refund to pay down that debt would be a very smart choice," said Rossman.
Increasing your emergency savings is another popular way to put your tax refund to work.
Almost 6 in 10 U.S. adults (58%) told Bankrate.com that they're concerned about their level of emergency savings.
"So especially with recession worries looming, boosting your savings would be wise," he said.
"You could perhaps do some of both – use some of your refund to pay down debt and put some into savings."
Worldwide, a case fatality rate of 3.5% was estimated for Covid-19 [22], and this rate was similar to that of Spanish influenza (2–3%) but much higher than that of seasonal influenza (0.1%)
[23].
Variable mortality rates for Covid-19, ranging from 18.9% to 0.1% [24], have been reported in different countries.
The overall case fatality rate was high in Belgium [25], in US
[26], and in UK [27].
Our study showed an overall case fatality rate of 3.1%, a figure that is comparable to figures in EMR countries (3.8%, 95% CI 3.8–3.9%)
[24], yet much higher than the figures reported for the GCC countries (0.6%, 95% CI 0.55–0.65%)
[28].
It was also comparable to rates in China [29] and Italy
[30].
Worldwide, over 80% of COVID-19 cases have mild symptoms; however 10 and 20% of COVID-19 cases proceed to a severe stage [31].
This pattern was similar to the situation shown in our study, where 24.3% of all patients with Covid-19 were hospitalized because of moderate to severe symptoms, while 75.7% of cases did not need hospitalization, probably because of their mild symptoms.
Reported mortality rates of COVID-19 patients are in the range of 20–40% for hospitalised patients and 30–88% for critically-ill or ICU patients with substantial differences between countries and regions [32].
This diversity was attributed to the different strategies of referral to hospital, admission strategies and decisions on treatment withdrawal [32].
In-hospital mortality rate among hospitalized cases, in our study, was 9.7%.
The incidence of fatalities in many developing countries appeared to be low in the early stages of the pandemic, due to their relatively younger age structure, poor vital statistics systems leading to underreporting of COVID-19 deaths, and lower access to good-quality healthcare [33].
However, this figure, in our study, is high when compared with the counterpart figure of 1.63% in Abu Dhabi, UAE
[34].
ICU utilization may be viewed as an indicator of the quality of healthcare delivered.
The global rates of 20–30% of Covid-19 ICU admissions were reported [35].
The overall rate of ICU admission in KSA in all regions for all COVID-19 patients who were admitted to hospital based on MOH criteria is almost was 50%
[36].
In our study, this rate of ICU admission was 20.3% of all hospitalized patients.
It was high compared to a rate of only 7.68% patients in Abu Dhabi.
ICU admission rate is a sensitive indicator for the severity of the illness.
In our study, the rate of in-hospital mortality among ICU admitted cases was 38.7%, a rate which is nearly two times the rate of 19.56% in Abu Dhabi.
This difference might be attributed to the difference in the strategy of hospitalization in the two countries, where in Abu Dhabi, initially, all people with a positive PCR were admitted regardless of clinical presentation for isolation and monitoring, a strategy that Saudi Arabia didn’t practice.
Patients’ characteristics, comorbidities and laboratory values have been reported and considered in the recent guidelines for the management of Covid-19 [35, 37,38,39].
Age was reported as the most significant predictor of mortality in patients with Covid-19 [40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50].
In our study, the old age of 70 or more was the only significant personal factor associated with in-hospital mortality among hospitalized Covid-19 patients.
Older patients showed higher tendency to progress to severe Covid-1 9 illness than relatively younger patients [21], and this was attributed to functional defects in immune cells, leading to inability to suppress viral replication, as age advances [45,46,47].
In our study, age of > 64 was the significant cut-off age for the prediction of in-hospital mortality from Covid-19.
This finding was in agreement with the finding of a cut-off value of ≥ 65 years reported in a previous study [51].
Some studies reported that obesity was a significant predictor of mortality from Covid-19
[52,53,54].
However, in our research, adjusting for other possible confounders, obesity was not amongst the predictors of mortality.
This finding was in agreement with the results of Stefan et.al
[25].
The association of obesity with lower mortality could be attributed to the possible natural protective effect of adipose tissue [55, 56], or to the lower levels of proinflammatory cytokines in obese subjects.
Hypertension, diabetes, and coronary heart disease were the most common comorbidities among Covid-19 patients, in our study.
These findings are similar to the common comorbidities observed in the US, Italy, China, and UAE
[34, 57, 58].
The following comorbidities were reported as key predictors for Covid-cases progression: Diabetes mellitus [59,60,61], hypertension
[60,61,62,63], COPD [59], and Ischemic heart disease [43].
In our study, of all these comorbidities, ischaemic heart disease was the only significant predictor of in-hospital mortality, and Covid-19 cases who suffered from ischemic heart disease were two times more likely to end with in-hospital mortality.
In a nested case–control study to evaluate the risk of pre-existing comorbidities on Covid-19 mortality
[64], in-hospital mortality was three times more likely to occur among cases with pre-existing cardiac disease than those without.
Early medical intervention is necessary for Covid-19 patients with pre-existing comorbidities, especially cardiac disease.
In terms of laboratory results, the following abnormal laboratory findings were reported as key predictors for Covid-19 cases progression; d-dimer [59, 60, 65,66,67,68], CRP
[59, 64, 67,68,69,70,71], LDH
[60, 72,73,74,75,76], lymphocytes [59, 60, 62, 68,69,70, 73, 74, 77], and procalcitonin levels [78].
In our study, in-hospital mortality was significantly associated with abnormal values of CRP, with a cut-off of 72.25 mg/L (AUC = 0.64).
CRP has been reported as a significant predictor of severe Covid-19 illness [79], and an early marker of infection and inflammation [80].
In our study, d-dimer was a significant predictor of in-hospital mortality, with a cut-off value of > 1125 µg/L (AUC = 0.75).
Increased d-dimer levels was associated with microthrombi formation, resulting from viral management of vascular endothelial cells [81].
Increased procalcitonin levels was associated with severe bacterial infection, and progression to severe condition in Covid-19 patients [78].
In our study, abnormal procalcitonin level was a predictor of, with a cut-off value of > 0.18 ng/mL (AUC = 0.76).
The pathogenesis of highly pathogenic human coronavirus is still not completely understood.
Cytokine storm and viral evasion of cellular immune responses are thought to play important roles in disease severity
[82].
Low lymphotic count was a significant predictor of in-hospital mortality, with a cut-off value of < 1.10 × 10^9/L (AUC = 0.72).
Lymphocytes were reported to help clear SARS-CoV, and a suboptimal T-cell response was found to cause pathological changes observed in mice with SARS-CoV
[83].
High neutrophil count was a significant predictor of in-hospital mortality as well, with a cut-off value of > 5,745 × 10^9/L (AUC = 0.70).
Neutrophils are the main source of chemokines and cytokines.
The generation of cytokine storm can lead to ARDS, which is a leading cause of death in patients with severe acute respiratory syndromer and Middle East respiratory syndrome
[84].
However, further studies are needed to characterize the role of the neutrophil and lymphocyte response in SARS-CoV-2 infection.
These indicators would help in early prediction and guide for proper, timely treatment.
Protests in multiple Chinese cities over the strict COVID-19 policies enforced by China’s government reflect the growing sentiment of people around the world.
We’re tired of the pandemic, and tired of the myriad ways the SARS-CoV-2 virus has changed our lives forever.
But the demonstrations in China also reflect a more specific, local frustration with a strategy for controlling the virus that every other country in the world has long since left behind.
China’s zero-COVID strategy is an extension of the drastic measures instituted, not only in that country but in others around the world, including the U.S., during the early days of the pandemic in an effort to quash the virus as quickly as possible.
That made sense at the beginning when people had no immunity to the virus, and there were no vaccines or treatments to fight it.
In fact, instituting lockdowns and keeping people from mingling are among the public health pillars of controlling an infectious disease.
“Employing quarantine, isolation, and testing are all core public health strategies that we use in all sorts of outbreaks,” says Caitlin Rivers, an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security.
“And they remain viable.
But they don’t always infringe on basic freedoms and rights in the same way we have seen in China.
Clearly in this instance, they have become very extensive.”
China’s strategy has been to test people regularly before they leave their residences, or enter public facilities, and when anyone tests positive, to immediately quarantine the facility where the case arose, even if it means preventing people from returning home from work or from a daytrip Disneyland.
From there, people who test positive are transferred to isolation facilities where they remain until they produce negative tests before they are allowed to return home.
But while chasing after the virus in this way can limit its spread, such stalking can only go so far.
Ultimately, the virus escapes, and new infections are seeded.
In SARS-CoV-2’s case, that likelihood is increased by the fact that the virus also lives in animal hosts where it continues to thrive, and mutate, waiting for opportunities to infect vulnerable human hosts with little defensive immunity against it.
“It’s difficult to envision how a zero-COVID policy would eradicate this virus,” says Dr. Ian Lipkin, director of the center for infection and immunity at Columbia Mailman School of Public Health.
“Even if you exclude all human beings from being hosts, there are still animal reservoirs capable of carrying the virus, and reintroducing it into human populations.”
While other countries, including Australia, the U.K., and the U.S. instituted a quarantine system similar to China’s in the early days of the pandemic, health officials there always acknowledged it would be a temporary solution, until the population’s immunity could be bolstered, both from exposure to natural infections and ultimately by vaccines.
For China, however, the strategy has been inflexible, and without a clearly defined exit strategy—largely because of how tightly intertwined it is with the authority and stature of the ruling Chinese Communist Party.
“Politically, the pandemic response has been framed as a competition between two political systems, and Xi Jinping used China’s early success to showcase the superiority of the Chinese political system,” says Yanzhong Huang, senior fellow for global health at the Council on Foreign Relations, and professor of global governance and health issues in Asia at Seton Hall University.
“”Theoretically, if they are able to sustain a low level of infection after other countries have moved away from zero COVID policies, they could claim they are the only winners in the fight.
So the high political stakes also contributed to China keeping these policies.”
Meanwhile, for the rest of the world, when effective vaccines became available at the end of 2020, a zero-tolerance strategy quickly became obsolete.
As a population’s protection against the virus mounts due to immunizations, then confining infected people and trying to shut down large regions becomes no longer necessary.
That’s the approach that Australia took, after a zero-COVID policy at the beginning of the pandemic.
But, says Rivers, the difference was that Australia set a limit to the strict lockdowns, promising to lift them when 80% of the population had been vaccinated and therefore were better protected against severe disease.
“There needs to be an exit strategy,” she says.
“Australia clearly defined that strategy to keep the public on board and understand what the path forward was.
It was also important to make sure the country didn’t get stuck in an unsustainable place.”
China may be in such a situation, with no clearly articulated end to its current policy.
The threats to global public health posed by China’s policy
Keeping people isolated does give the virus fewer opportunities to spread and infect locally, but in a worldwide pandemic, that may not be the most desirable end result.
People who are inadequately vaccinated, or who haven’t had much exposure to natural infection with the virus, fail to generate strong T-cell responses, which scientists believe is important for longer-lasting protection against serious COVID-19 disease.
Much of the rest of the world has been building this T-cell defense, due to a combination of vaccination, boosting, and exposure to and infection with COVID-19.
China’s population may still be in the nascent stages of amassing this type of protection.
“Basically they have a population that is inadequately protected by either earlier infection or vaccination, who are now at risk for spread of the virus,” says Lipkin.
Contributing to that is the fact that studies show that the vaccines taken by the majority of China’s population, made in-country by two local companies, Sinovac and Sinopharm, haven’t provided as much protection against infection or severe disease as those produced in the U.S. and Europe.
Those vaccines use inactivated forms of the SARS-CoV-2 virus to stimulate the immune system, while other approaches have utilized new mRNA or viral vector technologies.
That means that China’s population, although it may be immunized, may not be as protected as they could be.
Indeed, Lipkin says that were China to deploy vaccines like the mRNA shot from Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna, or the viral vector vaccines from AstraZeneca, as booster shots, it could improve the protection begun by the inactivated virus vaccines the Chinese have used to date.
Chinese scientists have been working on these other types of vaccines, including mRNA shots, but the health leadership has not yet endorsed these for widespread use in the country.
Then there is the human and economic toll of quarantining people, cutting them off from and disrupting their social, professional, and cultural connections.
The result has been that pent up frustrations have erupted into protests against not just the restrictive COVID-19 policies, but the entire communist system in recent weeks, in a stunning and rapidly spreading movement.
“I think the Party was caught off guard when they were seeing protests in multiple cities,” says Huang.
How to take the next step forward
Health experts agree that the path out of zero-COVID is to accelerate vaccination of the population, which Chinese leadership has been attempting to execute in recent weeks.
Party officials are fighting a problem of their own making, however, as many elderly members of the population have not been immunized because they don’t feel the urgency in a country where cases had been relatively low given the strict lockdowns.
In a report released on Nov. 28, government health officials in China said 65.8% of people over age 80 years had received a booster dose.
That’s an increase from the 40% reported in the middle of the month—but still far too low.
Even if more people are boosted, given the waning protection provided by those shots, especially against newer Omicron variants, such boosters may not be enough to bolster the population’s immunity to levels that would justify phasing out the zero COVID policy.
As long as the virus is able to produce more copies of itself, it will continue to evolve and generate new mutations, some of which could become variants that spread more quickly or cause more severe disease.
The roulette wheel of viral mutations continues to spin, and the best defense to slow it down is through immunity—either from vaccinations or bouts of infections.
“China has a population with very little infection-acquired immunity.
And the vaccine acquired immunity has not held up well over time against new variants,” says Rivers.
“So we expect a population that is largely susceptible.
And those are conditions for large waves of infections.
From a public health perspective, I would expect widespread vaccination and boosting of older people.
But that is as much a political question as a public health one.”
Vaccinations to protect children from six months – age 5 are now available.
The FDA and CDC recommends all children in this age group be vaccinated using the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines which are approved for Emergency Use Authorization (EUA).
The vaccinations are a smaller dose than adolescents and adults.
Parents should contact their clinic to schedule an appointment.
Some local pharmacies are also making the vaccines available.
How soon should children in this age group receive vaccination?
MercyOne experts say vaccination of children as soon as it’s available is the best choice, but the availability of COVID-19 vaccines for this youngest age group may be limited to begin.
While parents with children in this age group have expressed excitement, others say they want to “wait and see” how the vaccines work.
“The wait and see approach may not be very useful,“ says MercyOne pediatrician Dr. Mustafa Eldadah.
“Every day a child is unvaccinated there is risk of them getting a COVID-19 infection.
We encourage families to get their child vaccinated as soon as possible.
The vaccine is safe and getting it now can help put an end to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Children can be fully protected by the time school starts.”
What are the benefits of vaccinating children?
While most children are at lower risk for severe illness from COVID-19, there are still many unknown long-term effects.
While uncommon, it is also possible for children infected with COVID-19 to become seriously ill or worse.
Vaccination also allows for a safer return to activities and normal life.
Vaccination will:
Help prevent the risk of serious illness like Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C)
Keep your child from missing sporting events or extracurricular activities after exposure
Reduce the need to quarantine if your child is exposed to COVID-19 at school or elsewhere
Help prevent long-term effects of COVID-19
Reduce the risk of passing COVID-19 infection to family members and others at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19
Dr. Eldadah says like any vaccination, some local side effects can happen, however most are minimal.
Common side effects include:
Pain at the injection site
Fatigue (feeling tired)
Headache
Diarrhea
Muscle aches
Joint stiffness
More kids reported side effects with the second dose compared to the first dose.
Rare side effects can happen, such as swollen lymph nodes or skin sensitivity, but these are not long-term and resolved in most cases in a few days.
“Most side effects go away on their own,” says Dr. Eldadah.
“Parents can use acetaminophen to provide some relief.
Providing plenty of fluids to keep the child well hydrated is also important.
If you still have concerns, reach out to your pediatrician or family medicine provider.
Care during COVID-19 and other illnesses is best when parents and providers communicate and work together to develop a care plan.”
Are COVID-19 vaccines safe?
“Development of COVID-19 vaccines for children in this age group and older took about three years, including the requests for more data,” said Dr. Eldadah.
“This should help assure the public the vaccine is safe and provides an effective immune response against infection.
Even if a COVID-19 infection occurs, the vaccine can help avoid significant complications or the need for hospitalization.”
“I understand families may have concerns after going online looking for information,” says Dr. Eldadah.
“It’s important they visit credible websites like the CDC or American Academy of Pediatrics or family medicine sites.
These sites share exactly the number of cases and impact in studies.
If you still have questions, contact your doctor.”
My child had COVID.
Do they need the vaccine?
We know that "natural immunity" can be high, but protection can drop off quickly or change based on circulating variants.
If you had COVID-19 once, it is possible to get a different strain again.
Evidence shows the vaccines protect you longer and for all the variants to date.
Most importantly, the vaccine gives protection and prevents hospitalization for several of the COVID variants.
Your child can get the COVID-19 vaccine once they are out of quarantine.
There is no "waiting period," as another strain may come, and the vaccine will protect from getting hospitalized.
Scheduling a vaccination appointment for your child can vary by region.
When ready, contact your pediatric or family medicine physician.
When COVID-19 spread across the world in 2020, uncertainty about the novel coronavirus left many questions unanswered.
But experts knew one thing: Research would be critical in saving lives.
Nearly three years later, life-saving technologies developed from years of research are helping the world return to some sense of normalcy.
“It’s still not over, but the availability of vaccines and better treatments and testing that have been developed by companies worldwide have us in a much better place,” said Dr. Vin Gupta, a national leader in public health based at the University of Washington’s Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation and pulmonologist in the U.S. Air Force Medical Reserve Corps.
Dr. Gupta working alongside respiratory therapists and critical care nurses in the U.S. Air Force's Critical Care Air Transport team, outside of his work at Amazon.
The mobile ICU in the back of a C130 can transport critically ill patients requiring ventilatory support.
In addition to his clinical work and military service, Dr. Gupta has supported Amazon’s broader health efforts over the last three years.
During the pandemic, he joined experts across the company who refocused their work to help guide Amazon’s efforts to support employees and the broader community.
An Amazon associate delivers test tubes and swabs for COVID-19 test kits to the University of Washington Medical Center and Seattle Children’s Hospital.
Amazon's disaster relief and response team prepares a shipment to Nepal in response to a 1200% increase in COVID-19 cases.
Amazon partners with local agencies to deliver meals to those most vulnerable to COVID-19.
Amazon Web Services (AWS)
Diagnostic Development Initiative Diagnostic imagery of a lung, which illustrates the work of the cross-functional AWS team that launched the, which helped organizations worldwide apply the power of the cloud to accelerate diagnostics research and development.
$5 million Neighborhood Small Business Relief Fund Amazon created ato provide cash grants to Seattle small businesses that need assistance.
“Amazon was approached with requests for technical, financial, and logistical support from a range of key stakeholders worldwide to bolster pandemic response,” said Dr. Gupta.
“In addition to guiding employee safety efforts, part of my job was to help identify public health projects with strong potential that Amazon was optimally suited to support.
Our teams supported a number of operational and implementational projects, but we also identified two projects on the clinical research side that we felt were particularly promising to impact society at scale.”
Photo by Lucas Jackson
On the operational side, the most obvious application of Amazon’s strengths was using its logistical networks to deliver critical supplies, like oxygen and COVID-19 tests.
Supporting clinical research was a unique effort for a company like Amazon, which helped fund two studies during the pandemic that focused on researching treatments for COVID-19 patients and potentially better, more accurate testing.
“The world clearly needs a multidisciplinary company like Amazon to fill the many voids that arise during a crisis,” said Dr. Gupta.
“We took the next step with these studies because we also have a lot of scientific and clinical expertise within the company that allowed us to help, not only from a funding standpoint, but also in stewarding and guiding the studies from a strategic lens.”
Testing the efficacy of plasma in treating critical cases
The first study Amazon supported aimed to gain a better understanding of the role convalescent plasma could play in treating patients with severe COVID-19 infections.
At the time, doctors had no vaccines or therapeutics.
“The medical community was sort of throwing darts at a wall to find effective treatments, and this was a promising start,” Dr. Gupta said.
“There had been some research during Ebola that convalescent plasma from patients who’d recovered from the virus could help with recovery when given to somebody who was acutely sick with Ebola.
In a way, it was giving them the immunity that somebody else had built up.
We wanted to see if this could be applied to COVID-19 as well.”
The study was spearheaded by Columbia University researchers.
Dr. Gupta provided advice to those running the trial, diving deep into the study’s design and execution.
The committee worked closely with researchers testing the treatment in regions with high infection rates, including New York City and Brazil.
The results, which were published in The Journal of Clinical Investigation, showed a promising effect among patients infected with the Delta variant.
“The trial demonstrated that in adults hospitalized with severe COVID-19, use of convalescent plasma was associated with a statistically significant reduction in 28-day mortality versus the control arm,” said Dr. Gupta.
While the use of plasma to treat COVID-19 has been debated as new variants come into play, findings from this research helped guide physicians’ decisions in treating the initial Delta variant.
The study also provided a base knowledge as research continues on the treatment’s efficacy with newer variants.
Dr. Gupta working with physicians in a Seattle-based intensive care unit during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Raising the bar on rapid testing to detect and prevent infections
In parallel with the plasma study, Dr. Gupta provided guidance for a clinical study to develop testing protocols.
The study was led by the global health organization PATH (formally known as the Program for Appropriate Technology in Health) and supported by both Amazon and the Rockefeller Foundation, which met biweekly to help design and execute the study.
“We were trying to solve for a unique problem here: How do you get somebody rapidly screened who might not be symptomatic?”
Dr. Gupta said.
“We ran head-to-head comparisons on the available low-cost, rapid testing technologies in an effort to provide clarity on which one would be best to screen masses of people quickly for a disease like COVID-19 that can easily spread because it’s so contagious.”
The study focused on locales that were hotspots during the pandemic, with researchers working in Brazil during the country’s large wave of infections.
Dr. Gupta said the study was key to better understanding the real-world utility of rapid testing for COVID-19 and to help minimize the chance of outbreaks.
“There were some tests that consistently performed above the rest,” he said.
“These tests were better able to capture lower levels of virus than others, which is important because that meant they had a better likelihood of detecting infection in someone who was asymptomatic before they could spread the virus to others.”
Dr. Gupta said the study’s findings contributed to “the growing literature” about which rapid tests best detected those early infections.
“This is critical information.
While additional work is required, stopping infectious disease outbreaks—now and in the future—requires testing platforms that can detect asymptomatic infection,” he said.
Going forward, knowledge is power
Communities worldwide are learning to live alongside COVID-19 while also preparing for future challenges.
Research is ongoing, but hundreds of studies conducted during the pandemic continue to inform important decisions made by researchers, medical professionals, and communities.
“With scale comes great responsibility, especially in an era of a pandemic,” said Dr. Gupta.
“Amazon has already contributed in meaningful ways—through clinical research, leveraging the cloud to accelerate novel point-of-care testing solutions, and agile disaster response—that have saved lives and will significantly strengthen future pandemic response.
This is a natural mission for our enterprise that I hope we will continue to embrace.”
Learn more about Amazon’s efforts during the pandemic.
Several case studies suggest COVID-19 might be a risk factor for brain aneurysms and ruptures.
Bodily responses to SARS-CoV-2, such as inflammation, could explain why.
However, there is currently no direct evidence for this link.
Since 2019 , the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has caused over 593 million infections.
These infections correspond to 6 million deaths and many more episodes of ill health.
Indeed, since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, scientists have documented an array of complications of this disease.
This article looks at the connection between SARS-CoV-2 infections and brain aneurysms.
After discussing a possible link between these conditions, it provides more general information about COVID-19 and brain health.
It also discusses the causes and signs of brain aneurysms.
Coronavirus data All data and statistics are based on publicly available data at the time of publication.
Some information may be out of date.
Visit our coronavirus hub for the most recent information on COVID-19.
Was this helpful?
Can SARS-CoV-2 infection lead to a brain aneurysm?
Share on Pinterest gorodenkoff/Getty Images A 2021 study makes clear that there is currently no solid evidence that COVID-19 can cause the formation of brain aneurysms.
The possible link between COVID-19 and brain aneurysms is a matter for scientific study.
Scientists define brain aneurysms as thin or weak spots on a brain artery.
The weak spot balloons, or bulges out, filling with blood.
It has the potential to leak into the brain, and even to rupture.
Learn the link between COVID-19 and headaches.
Why do people think there is a link?
Some scientists believe that COVID-19 is a risk factor for brain aneurysms.
As the 2021 study mentioned above explains, this is partly because doctors have recorded several cases of people with severe COVID-19 developing a brain aneurysm.
Researchers also note similar case studies in which people with COVID-19 experienced ruptured brain aneurysms.
A 2021 paper records other such cases.
Therefore, some scientists think COVID-19 could be a risk factor for ruptured brain aneurysms, too.
In theory, certain bodily responses to infection could explain these potential links between COVID-19 and brain aneurysms.
In people with severe COVID-19, inflammation could cause damage to the blood vessels in the brain.
Hypercytokinemia may do the same.
Hypercytokinemia is an extreme immune response.
During this response, the body releases too many cytokines into the bloodstream.
Cytokines are special proteins, and although they can be extremely useful, their overabundance is harmful.
People hospitalized with severe COVID-19 often endured this overabundance in what researchers called a “cytokine storm.”
COVID-19 can cause inflammation and hypercytokinemia.
However, there is no strong evidence that COVID-19 causes or increases the risk of brain aneurysms or making them rupture.
Learn how common brain aneurysms may be.
Causes of brain aneurysm There is plenty of evidence that brain aneurysms can develop for many reasons other than COVID-19.
Some causes of brain aneurysms include: hypertension
alcohol addiction
smoking
cocaine use
atherosclerosis
tumors
trauma
endocarditis Older adults have an increased risk of brain aneurysm.
There is also evidence that some genetic factors could predispose people to this condition.
The takeaway here is that the diagnostic process for severe COVID-19 hospitalization may have unveiled other serious health concerns that may have never been discovered except for the COVID-19 diagnosis.
Signs of an aneurysm According to the National Institutes of Health , an unruptured cerebral aneurysm typically does not cause symptoms.
However, if this aneurysm grows large enough, it may put pressure on tissues or nerves.
This could result in: pain
numbness
weakness
vision changes
dilated pupil
A ruptured aneurysm always causes a sudden, very severe headache.
It may also lead to: double vision
nausea
vomiting
stiff neck
seizures
loss of consciousness
cardiac arrest In some cases, an aneurysm may leak blood into the brain, causing a sentinel headache.
Learn more about headaches from brain aneurysms.
The National Institutes of Health advises that anyone with symptoms of a brain aneurysm seek immediate medical attention.
This is especially true if someone experiences a sudden and severe headache.
Ruptured brain aneurysms are medical emergencies.
They require urgent and specialized care.
Symptoms of COVID-19 include coughing, fever, and a loss of taste or smell.
Anyone with these symptoms should contact a doctor and follow the COVID-19 guidelines in their local area.
While the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic seems to have passed, the effects of post-COVID conditions on public health remain.
A new study led by Weill Cornell Medicine and NewYork-Presbyterian investigators has found that the risk of long COVID and its symptoms present very differently across diverse populations and suggests that further investigation is needed to accurately define the disease and improve diagnosis and treatment.
The study, published April 7 in Nature Communications, analyzed electronic health records as part of the National Institutes of Health’s Researching COVID to Enhance Recovery (RECOVER) Initiative to better understand the persistence of symptoms after SARS-CoV-2 infection, also known as long COVID, among broad, diverse populations.
Led by Dr. Rainu Kaushal, chair of the Department of Population Health Sciences at Weill Cornell Medicine and physician-in-chief of population health sciences at New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, the research provides an overview of potential symptoms after acute COVID-19 and how the risk of these conditions may vary among different populations in the United States.
“Long COVID is a new disease that is very complicated and quite difficult to characterize,” said Dr. Chengxi Zang, an instructor in population health sciences at Weill Cornell Medicine and lead author on the paper.
“It affects multiple organs and presents a severe burden to society, making it urgent that we define this disease and determine how well that definition applies among different populations.
This paper provides the basis for furthering research on long COVID.”
The team studied electronic health records from two clinical research networks that are part of the National Patient-Centered Clinical Research Network (PCORnet).
One dataset, from the INSIGHT Clinical Research Network—which Dr. Kaushal leads—included data from 11 million New York-based patients, while the other came from the OneFlorida+ network, which included 16.8 million patients from Florida, Georgia and Alabama.
The team identified a broad list of diagnoses that occurred more frequently in patients who had recently had COVID compared with non-infected individuals.
The researchers also found more types of symptoms and higher risk of long COVID in New York City than Florida.
Specific conditions found across the New York City and Florida populations included dementia, hair loss, sores in the stomach and small intestine, blood clots in the lung, chest pain, abnormal heartbeat and fatigue.
“Our approach, which uses machine learning with electronic health records, provides a data-driven way to define long COVID and determine how generalizable our definition of the disease is,” Dr. Zang said.
Comparing records across diverse populations in regions that experienced the COVID-19 pandemic differently highlighted how variable long COVID is for patients and emphasized the need for further investigation to improve the diagnosis and treatment of the disease.
Some of the differences between the results from the two populations might be explained by the fact that New York City had a more diverse patient population, endured one of the first waves of the pandemic and faced the lack of personal protective equipment such as masks, compared with Florida, Dr. Zang said.
The new study is related to previous work by Dr. Kaushal, who is also senior associate dean for clinical research and the Nanette Laitman Distinguished Professor of Population Health Sciences at Weill Cornell Medicine, and colleagues, that categorized different subtypes of long COVID.
“In this new research, we examined a broad list of potential long COVID conditions one by one,” said Dr. Fei Wang, associate professor of population health sciences and co-senior author of the study.
“These findings can help us better recognize the broad involvement of multiple organ systems in long COVID, and design appropriate plans for patient management and treatment development.”
Many Weill Cornell Medicine physicians and scientists maintain relationships and collaborate with external organizations to foster scientific innovation and provide expert guidance.
The institution makes these disclosures public to ensure transparency.
For this information, see profiles for Dr. Fei Wang and Dr. Rainu Kaushal.
Washington, D.C. — U.S. Senator Marco Rubio (R-FL) sent a letter to Dr. Lawrence Bacow, President of Harvard University, regarding a potential quid pro quo agreement in which officials from the real estate company, Evergrande, which has close ties to the Chinese Communist Party, donated $115 million to Harvard Medical School in exchange for access to influential American virology experts, including Dr. Anthony Fauci, who were studying the origins of COVID-19.
Just days after Harvard received the donation, Harvard-linked virology experts, some of whom had previously hypothesized that the virus may have been engineered in and leaked from a lab in Wuhan, China, privately and publicly condemned and erroneously discounted the possibility that the virus may have emerged as a result of a research-related incident at the state-run Wuhan Institute of Virology.
“While Evergrande is ostensibly a private company, the laws of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) make it clear that all companies are required to comply with CCP directives,” Rubio wrote.
“…Given Harvard University’s long history of working in China and interacting with PRC officials, I would expect that you and others in the university’s leadership would have seen Evergrande’s outreach for what it was: a CCP attempt to obscure the origin of the coronavirus that causes COVID-19 and absolve itself of responsibility for having caused the worst pandemic in a century.”
The full text of the letter is below.
Dear President Bacow:
Harvard University is regarded as one of the most prestigious institutions of higher education in the world.
This adds credibility to any endeavor that bears its name.
Accordingly, you, along with the entirety of Harvard’s faculty and staff, have a weighty responsibility to ensure that this credibility is not misused to further purposes at odds with the university’s mission, or worse, those that are detrimental to the interests of the American people.
It has come to my attention that in the early days of the COVID-19 outbreak in the United States, you, Harvard Provost Alan Garber, and Harvard Medical School Dean George Daley facilitated what would become a concerning relationship between Dr. Anthony Fauci and the Chinese property developer Evergrande.
According to reporting by The Spectator, these interactions apparently shaped two subsequent developments: 1) a donation by Evergrande to Harvard Medical School to the tune of $115 million, and 2) a decision by U.S. scientists and public health officials, including Dr. Fauci, to publicly dismiss the possibility that the novel coronavirus emerged as a result of a research-related incident, likely at the state-run Wuhan Institute of Virology, after these same scientists and officials had discussed this very hypothesis in private and deemed it plausible.
While The Spectator did not characterize the situation in precisely these terms, the coincidental timing of these events suggests the possibility of a quid pro quo, whereby Harvard officials, in return for a large donation from Evergrande, contacted American public health officials to convince them that Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP) preferred theory of the origin of COVID-19 was the only theory that should be seriously considered.
The CCP’s outreach to Harvard through Evergrande is consistent with the CCP’s past attempts to influence decision-making in other countries, including the United States, through non-traditional means as well as influential actors in the private sector and civil society.
While Evergrande is ostensibly a private company, the laws of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) make it clear that all companies are required to comply with CCP directives.
The Australian government has rightly declared that “there is no such thing” as a “private company” in the PRC.
Given Harvard University’s long history of working in China and interacting with PRC officials, I would expect that you and others in the university’s leadership would have seen Evergrande’s outreach for what it was: a CCP attempt to obscure the origin of the coronavirus that causes COVID-19 and absolve itself of responsibility for having caused the worst pandemic in a century.
As Vice Chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and a member of the Senate Committee on Appropriations, I have a responsibility to the American taxpayer to ensure that recipients of federal funding, like Harvard, are not complicit in the CCP’s malicious attempts to subvert the interests of the United States, including the search for the origin of COVID-19.
As such, I request your prompt response to the following questions:
Did you, or other members of Harvard’s administration, contact the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) or other law enforcement agencies with concerns about Evergrande’s attempt to contact Dr. Fauci through Harvard?
When Evergrande Founder and CCP member Xu Jiayin contacted you in January 2020, he reportedly asserted that there had been no interaction between the National Institute for Health (NIH) or the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and their counterparts in the PRC.
Were you not aware that Dr. George Gao, the director-general of the Chinese CDC, had not only been in contact with Dr. Robert Redfield, the U.S. CDC Director, on multiple occasions since the beginning of January but that Gao had also refused support offered by the United States?
When Harvard Medical School Dean George Daley contacted Dr. Fauci on February 2, 2020, had Evergrande already communicated its intent to pledge $115 million to Harvard Medical School?
Please provide, publicly, the terms of the donation made by Evergrande to Harvard Medical School.
Did Evergrande condition this donation on any specific action by Harvard or Harvard faculty?
Please disclose the details of the meeting between Evergrande and Dean Daley mentioned in Dean Daley’s February 2nd email to Dr. Fauci.
Please disclose the full contents of the redacted email from Evergrande’s Chief Health Officer, Dr. Jack Lu, to Dean Daley that was included in the February 2nd email.
Please provide a full accounting of how Harvard spent the $12 million of the $115 million donation it has received from Evergrande.
Can you detail whether any of that money went directly to the Harvard Medical School leadership?
The United States has entered an era of great power competition with the CCP, a regime that has explicitly called for the displacement of the United States as the world’s leading power.
It is incumbent on all Americans to be vigilant against the CCP’s attempts to weaken the United States and our institutions, including our educational institutions.
Based on Harvard’s previous interactions with Evergrande and, by extension, Beijing, I can only assume that Harvard is either ignorant about the threat of the CCP at best or actively supporting our principal adversary at worst.
Thank you in advance for your prompt response to these questions.
Sincerely,
FDA authorized Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir and ritonavir) in December 2021 for the treatment of mild-to-moderate COVID-19 in adults and pediatric patients (12 years of age and older weighing at least 40 kg) with positive results of direct SARS-CoV-2 viral testing who are also at high risk for progression to severe COVID-19, including hospitalization or death.
Paxlovid is now widely available in community pharmacies.
Although the number of COVID-19 hospitalizations has decreased dramatically since early 2022, some high-risk patients are still getting sick enough to require hospital admission, and early treatment with Paxlovid and other available authorized or approved therapeutics could make a difference.
In this CDER Conversation, Dr. John Farley, director of the Office of Infectious Diseases, provides useful information that can help health care providers in decision making regarding Paxlovid, the preferred therapy for the management of non-hospitalized adults with COVID-19, according to the National Institutes of Health COVID Treatment Guidelines.
What does “direct SARS-CoV-2 viral testing” mean?
Do patients need a positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test to be treated with Paxlovid?
Direct SARS-CoV-2 viral tests are used to diagnose infection by SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
Direct SARS-CoV-2 viral tests include two types of diagnostic tests for COVID-19:
Molecular tests, such as PCR tests, that detect the virus’s genetic material.
Rapid antigen diagnostic tests that detect specific proteins from the virus.
There are many rapid antigen tests authorized for home use.
Patients in the authorized population who report a positive home test result from a rapid antigen diagnostic test to their provider are eligible for Paxlovid under the emergency use authorization (EUA).
A positive result on a PCR test also meets the requirement under the EUA to have a positive test result.
Confirmation of a positive home rapid antigen diagnostic test with additional direct SARS-CoV-2 viral testing, such as a PCR, is not required.
Serologic tests are not considered to be direct SARS-CoV-2 viral tests.
How should health care providers assess a patient for “high risk for progression to severe COVID-19”?
Patients in the authorized population with a risk factor for progression to severe COVID-19 are eligible for Paxlovid under the EUA even if they are fully vaccinated.
Patients do not have to have more than one risk factor to be considered “high risk”.
We recognize that risk factors have changed over time, and that it is appropriate to consider vaccination status in assessing a patient’s risk for progression to severe COVID-19.
For more information on medical conditions and factors associated with increased risk for progression to severe COVID-19, please visit the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) website.
Are there tools to help health care providers manage potential drug-drug interactions?
Yes.
FDA recently updated the Fact Sheet for Health Care Providers for Paxlovid to provide more specific recommendations for some drugs.
We also developed a Prescriber Patient Eligibility Screening Checklist.
The checklist is intended to support clinical decision making, and I believe it will be a helpful addition to any prescriber’s “toolbox.”
Paxlovid contains nirmatrelvir and ritonavir.
Ritonavir is a strong inhibitor of cytochrome P450 3A. Potential drug-drug interactions are an important consideration.
However, several commonly used medications with potential interactions such as statins, oral contraceptives, and HIV medications can be easily managed under provider supervision.
Recommendations are provided in the Health Care Provider Fact Sheet and the Eligibility Screening Checklist Tool along with an alphabetized list of other drugs with potentially significant drug interactions.
Other resources regarding management of drugs with potentially significant drug interactions with Paxlovid include:
Is dose adjustment of Paxlovid needed for patients with moderate renal impairment?
Yes.
Paxlovid is now supplied in two different dose packs, one for standard dosing and one for moderate renal impairment dosing.
In patients with moderate renal impairment (eGFR ≥30 to <60 mL/min), the dosage of Paxlovid is 150 mg nirmatrelvir (one 150 mg tablet) and 100 mg ritonavir (one 100 mg tablet) twice daily for five days.
Patients with mild renal impairment (eGFR ≥60 to <90 mL/min) should receive the standard dose of 300 mg nirmatrelvir (two 150 mg tablets) and 100 mg ritonavir (one 100 mg tablet) with all three tablets taken together orally twice daily for five days.
Paxlovid is not recommended at this time in patients with severe renal impairment (eGFR <30 mL/min).
Health care providers may rely on patient history and access to the patient’s health records to make an assessment regarding the likelihood of renal impairment.
Providers may consider ordering a serum creatinine or calculating the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) for certain patients after assessment on a case-by-case basis.
How can I locate a community pharmacy that has Paxlovid in stock?
Paxlovid is now widely available at community pharmacies.
The U.S. government maintains a locator tool for COVID-19 therapeutics that lists community pharmacies that have Paxlovid in stock.
Use the search glass icon to enter the patient’s zip code.
Pharmacies will be listed by proximity.
What do we know about the case reports of patients developing symptoms again after completing a course of Paxlovid?
FDA is aware of the reports of some patients developing recurrent COVID-19 symptoms after completing a treatment course of Paxlovid.
In some of these cases, patients tested negative on a direct SARS-CoV-2 viral test and then tested positive again.
The benefit of a 5-day treatment course of Paxlovid was demonstrated in the clinical trial that supported the EUA.
This study showed that among non-hospitalized patients at high risk of progression to severe disease, treatment with Paxlovid reduced the risk of hospitalization or death by 88%.
Reductions in hospitalization and death were also demonstrated in clinical trials of other available approved (Veklury [remdesivir]) or authorized (Lagevrio [molnupiravir]) antiviral agents.
In light of these reports, additional analyses of the Paxlovid clinical trial data have been performed.
In the Paxlovid clinical trial, some patients (range 1-2%) had one or more positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR tests after testing negative, or an increase in the amount of SARS-CoV-2 detected by PCR, after completing their treatment course.
This finding was observed in patients treated with the drug as well as patients who received placebo, so it is unclear at this point that this is related to drug treatment.
Additional analyses show that most of the patients did not have symptoms at the time of a positive PCR test after testing negative, and, most importantly, there was no increased occurrence of hospitalization or death or development of drug resistance.
These reports, then, do not change the conclusions from the Paxlovid clinical trial which demonstrated a marked reduction in hospitalization and death.
We are continuing to review data from clinical trials and will provide additional information as it becomes available.
However, there is no evidence of benefit at this time for a longer course of treatment (e.g., 10 days rather than the 5 days recommended in the Provider Fact Sheet for Paxlovid) or repeating a treatment course of Paxlovid in patients with recurrent COVID-19 symptoms following completion of a treatment course.
In summary, Paxlovid reduces the risk of hospitalization and death for patients with mild-to-moderate COVID-19 at high risk of disease progression.
Health care providers should consider treatment with Paxlovid or other approved or authorized therapeutics in accordance with the approved labeling or authorized Health Care Provider Fact Sheets.
Patients who test positive for SARS-CoV-2 who have symptoms should discuss treatment options with their health care provider as soon as possible after testing positive.
Health care providers and patients should refer to CDC recommendations regarding patient isolation, and should wear a mask and isolate if they have any symptoms regardless of whether or not they have been treated with an antiviral agent.
Thank you, Dr. Farley.
Do you have any final remarks you'd like to share with health care providers about Paxlovid?
I would like to reiterate that Paxlovid is now widely available at community pharmacies.
There is strong scientific evidence that it reduces the risk of hospitalization and death in patients with mild-to-moderate COVID-19 at high risk for progression to severe disease.
It is also expected to be effective against the Omicron variant.
For more information about the EUA for Paxlovid, including possible risks of use, the Fact Sheet for Health Care Providers, and Prescriber Patient Eligibility Checklist, please visit FDA’s Emergency Use Authorizations webpage.
COVID test kits, treatments and vaccines won't be free to many consumers much longer
Enlarge this image toggle caption Alex Wong/Getty Images Alex Wong/Getty Images
Time is running out for free-to-consumer COVID-19 vaccines, at-home test kits and even some treatments.
The White House announced this month that the national public health emergency, first declared in early 2020 in response to the pandemic, is set to expire May 11.
When it ends, so will many of the policies designed to combat the virus's spread.
COVID vaccine makers are poised to raise prices
Take vaccines.
Until now, the federal government has been purchasing COVID-19 shots.
It recently bought 105 million doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech bivalent booster for about $30.48 a dose, and 66 million doses of Moderna's version for $26.36 a dose.
(These are among the companies that developed the first COVID vaccines sold in the United States.)
People will be able to get these vaccines at low or no cost as long as the government-purchased supplies last.
But even before the end date for the public emergency was set, Congress opted not to provide more money to increase the government's dwindling stockpile.
As a result, Pfizer and Moderna were already planning their moves into the commercial market.
Both have indicated that as soon as that happens, they will raise the price they charge, somewhere in the range of $110 to $130 per dose, though insurers and government health programs could negotiate lower rates.
"We see a double-digit billion[-dollar] market opportunity," investors were told at a JPMorgan conference in San Francisco recently by Ryan Richardson, chief strategy officer for BioNTech.
The company expects a gross price — the full price before any discounts — of $110 a dose, which, Richardson said, "is more than justified from a health economics perspective.
"
That could translate to tens of billions of dollars in revenue for the manufacturers, even if uptake of the vaccines is slow.
And consumers would foot the bill, either directly (in copays) or indirectly (through higher premiums and taxpayer-funded subsidies).
If half of adults — about the same percentage as those who opt for an annual flu shot — get a COVID shot at the new, higher prices, a recent KFF report estimated, insurers, employers and other payors would shell out $12.4 billion to $14.8 billion.
That's up to nearly twice as much as what it would have cost for every adult in the U.S. to get a bivalent booster at the average price paid by the federal government.
As for COVID treatments, an August blog post by the Department of Health and Human Services' Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response noted that government-purchased supplies of the drug Paxlovid are expected to last at least through midyear before the private sector takes over.
The government's bulk purchase price from manufacturer Pfizer was $530 for a course of treatment, and it isn't yet known what the companies will charge once government supplies run out.
The type of health insurance you have will determine how much more you'll pay
One thing is certain: How much, if any, of the boosted costs are passed on to consumers will depend on their health coverage.
Medicare beneficiaries, those enrolled in Medicaid — the state-federal health insurance program for people with low incomes — and people who have health plans via the Affordable Care Act exchanges will continue to get COVID-19 vaccines without charge, even when the public health emergency ends and the government-purchased vaccines run out.
Many people with job-based insurance will also likely not face copayments for vaccines, unless they go out-of-network for their vaccinations.
People with limited-benefit or short-term insurance policies might have to pay for all or part of their vaccinations.
And people who don't have insurance will need to either pay full cost out-of-pocket or seek no- or low-cost vaccinations from community clinics or other providers.
If they cannot find a free or low-cost option, some uninsured patients may feel forced to skip vaccinations or testing.
Coming up with what could be $100 or more for vaccination will be especially hard "if you are uninsured or underinsured; that's where these price hikes could drive additional disparities," said Sean Robbins, executive vice president of external affairs for the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association.
Those increases, he said, will also affect people with insurance, as the costs "flow through to premiums.
"
COVID-19 treatments will cost more, too.
Meanwhile, public policy experts say many private insurers will continue to cover Paxlovid, although patients may face a copayment, at least until they meet their deductible, just as they do for other medications.
Medicaid will continue to cover it without cost to patients until at least 2024.
Medicare beneficiaries will face cost-sharing for most COVID-19 treatments once the emergency officially ends and the government supply runs out.
Meanwhile, the treatment will also need to go through the regular FDA approval process, which takes longer than the emergency use authorization under which it has been marketed
Another complication: The rolls of the uninsured are likely to climb in the next year, with states poised to reinstate the process of regularly determining Medicaid eligibility; that sort of review was halted during the pandemic.
In April, states will begin reassessing whether Medicaid enrollees meet income and other qualifying factors.
An estimated 5 million to 14 million people nationwide might lose coverage.
"This is our No. 1 concern" right now, said John Baackes, CEO of L.A. Care, the nation's largest publicly operated health plan with 2.7 million members.
"They may not realize they've lost coverage until they go to fill a prescription" or seek other medical care, including vaccinations, he said.
At-home COVID tests won't be free for many people
Rules remain in place for insurers, including Medicare and Affordable Care Act plans, to cover the cost of up to eight in-home test kits a month for each person on the plan, until the public health emergency ends.
For consumers — including those without insurance — a government website is still offering up to four test kits per household, until they run out.
The Biden administration shifted funding to purchase additional kits and made them available in late December.
Starting in May, though, beneficiaries in original Medicare and many people with private, job-based insurance will have to start paying out-of-pocket for the rapid antigen test kits.
Some Medicare Advantage plans, which are an alternative to original Medicare, might opt to continue covering them without a copayment.
Policies will vary, so check with your insurer.
And Medicaid enrollees can continue to get the test kits without cost into mid-2024.
Overall, the future of COVID tests, vaccines and treatments will reflect the complicated mix of coverage consumers already navigate for most other types of care.
"From a consumer perspective, vaccines will still be free, but for treatments and test kits, a lot of people will face cost-sharing," said Jen Kates, a senior vice president at KFF.
"We're taking what was universal access and now saying we're going back to how it is in the regular U.S. health system.
"
KHN correspondent Darius Tahir contributed to this report.
KHN (Kaiser Health News) is a national, editorially independent program of KFF (Kaiser Family Foundation).
Results in Table 1 suggest that occupational mental health was initially improved during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, but it returned to pre-pandemic levels in 2021.
This trend was observed for both high-stress risk and occupational mental health.
By investigating a broader range of industries, the negative impact is found in the following years of the pandemic, which could result from the continuing prevention policies and the established new working style without appropriate work design.
The initial decrease in stress was likely due to the novelty of the situation by implementing remote work, which is consistent with the positive effect of FWA in prior studies12.
However, as the pandemic progressed, the blurring of work-life boundaries may lead to new challenges for workplace management2.
It is possible that impropriate workplace adjustment deteriorated stress levels again.
To further explore the detailed evidence on workplace factors, we use SEM to examine the individual heterogeneity in the workplace and identify how subgroups are affected differently by the pandemic.
Table 1 Baseline model results.
Full size table
High-stress risk
We test the changes in high-stress risk probability from 2019 to 2020 and 2020 to 2021.
Figure 1 shows the average partial effects and sorted partial effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on high-stress risk probability.
On average, the high-stress risk probability was reduced by 0.37% from 2019 to 2020 and then increased by 0.51% from 2020 to 2021.
This result indicates an initial reduction of high-stress risk in the early period of COVID-19 and then a return to the pre-pandemic levels.
Furthermore, the results of sorted partial effects show a significant variation in the change of high-stress risk among different population subgroups.
Specifically, the maximum reduction in high-stress risk from 2019 to 2020 reached 1.47% in the 2% percentile subgroup, and the maximum increase from 2020 to 2021 reached 2.00% in the 98% percentile subgroup.
The yearly average rate of high-stress employees ranges from 9 to 11% in our sample, which means in the worst case, there could be about an 18.2% (2% in 11%) increase in high-stress employees.
We further compared the high-stress risk change from 2018 to 2019, before the COVID-19 pandemic.
The results suggest an average increase of high-stress risk of about 0.20%, which is weaker than the effects during the pandemic.
The partial effects of the more negatively affected subgroup (above 90% percentile) have no significant difference from the average level, indicating considerable changes in high-stress risk due to the pandemic (See Appendix Fig. S2).
Additionally, we examine the subsamples before and after the emergency announcement period in 2020 and 2021, respectively, suggesting consistent results (see Appendix Fig. S3).
These results show that the impact of the pandemic on high-stress risk is not uniform.
Figure 1
The change in the probability of high-stress risk.
This figure shows the results from the sorted effect method: (a) the change in high-stress probability from 2019 to 2020 and (b) the change in high-stress probability from 2019 to 2020.
The black line indicates the average partial effects, and the black dashed line shows a 90% confidence interval.
The blue line indicates the sorted partial effects, and the light blue shade offers a 90% confidence interval.
Full size image
Classification analysis further explored the differences in individual workplace factors for the 10% most and 10% least affected subgroups.
Results in Fig. 2 show the differences in workplace factors between the most and least affected subgroups (see details in Appendix Table S5).
All the differences are statistically significant, suggesting that high-stress employees are in a very different work environment than those who are not.
The subgroup with lower scores in workplace factors experienced both an initial decrease and subsequent increase in high-stress risk.
The significant fluctuation at the high-stress levels is risky for high-stress employees, which needs urgent mitigation policies to prevent further detriments.
Conversely, employees with better workplace factors are almost unaffected by the pandemic.
These results suggest that a better workplace is essential to help employees adapt to changing workstyle during the pandemic.
Figure 2
The difference in workplace factors between the unaffected group and the affected group.
In 2020, the differences compared the 10% most unaffected subgroup with the 10% most improved subgroup.
In 2021, differences compared the 10% most deteriorated subgroup to the 10% most unaffected subgroup.
The error bar indicates a 99% confidence interval.
Full size image
By exploring the categories based on the job demands-resources theory, we identified the most influential workplace factors: interpersonal relationships at work in the job demands category, support from managers, job meaning, job control, and work-life balance in the three job resource categories.
Improving these identified workplace factors is expected to buffer the shock of the pandemic on high-stress risk.
For example, by improving interpersonal relationships at work, employees can have a sense of social support which can help them to cope with the stressful situations caused by the pandemic47.
Employees can access the information, feedback, and guidance they need to manage job demands by providing managers' support.
Notably, during the pandemic, job meaning and job control are critical factors that can help employees feel that their work is meaningful and that they have a degree of autonomy in their work48.
Improving work-life balance can help prevent work-related stress's spillover into employees' personal lives.
It is important to note that the effect of the pandemic on stress levels is complex and multifaceted.
Improving these factors can help to buffer the shock of the pandemic on high-stress risk, but it may not be enough to mitigate the negative effects of the pandemic completely.
As shown in Fig. 2, all 31 workplace factors significantly differ between the most and least affected groups.
The factors discussed above have a higher priority in effectively mitigating the negative pandemic impacts than the other factors.
In summary, these results answer research question 2 about the individual heterogeneity of the pandemic impacts on high-stress risk, which largely depends on personal workplace factors.
Occupational mental health
Figure 3 shows the change in occupational mental health from 2019 to 2020 and from 2020 to 2021.
On average, occupational mental health was improved by 0.15 from 2019 to 2020, while the sorted partial effects range from − 0.12 to 0.47.
On the other hand, the average change in occupational mental health was about − 0.06 from 2020 to 2021, while the sorted partial effects range from − 0.31 to 0.2.
These trends are consistent with those of high-stress risk, indicating that the pandemic's subsequent impacts may also be more severe than its initial impacts on general employees.
However, the heterogeneity of sorted partial effects is not that significant.
The impacts on occupational stress are relatively weaker but more widespread across employees.
The emergency announcement period studies show consistent results in Appendix Fig. S4.
Figure 3
The change in occupational mental health.
This figure shows the results from the sorted effect method: (a) the change in occupational mental health from 2019 to 2020 and (b) the change in occupational mental health from 2019 to 2020.
The black line indicates the average partial effects, and the black dashed line shows a 90% confidence interval.
The blue line indicates the sorted partial effects, and the light blue shade offers a 90% confidence interval.
Full size image
Still, we can distinguish the 10% most (positively) and 10% least (negatively) affected subgroups.
The classification analysis results in Fig.
4 show the difference in workplace factors between the most and least affected subgroups at the significant level of jointed P value less than 0.01 (see detailed results in Appendix Table S6).
Interestingly, employees who are most negatively affected by the pandemic in 2020 are those with higher scores of workplace factors, such as interpersonal relationships at work, monetary or status rewards, job meaning, trust in management, etc., which lead to greater work engagement49.
A possible explanation is that these engaged employees take more responsibility to rethink the strategies to cope with the pandemic, such as new job designs and work styles.
These tasks could be a stressor for engaged employees but to a controllable degree without developing into high-stress risks.
Quite the opposite, in the early phase of the pandemic, a reduced frequency of being physically present in the workplace provided less engaged employees temporary relief from stressors within the workplace.
Meanwhile, employees with fewer workplace supports had a more challenging time adapting to the changed work and lifestyle brought on by the pandemic, and their occupational mental health deteriorated again.
Classification analysis results indicate that employees in worse workplace conditions experienced the most negative impacts of the pandemic, especially worksite-level job resources, including fairness in evaluation, trust in management, adaptability to change, and respect for individuals.
In the consequent years of the pandemic, managers need to build and sustain trust by demonstrating transparency, empathy, and accountability50.
Ensuring that evaluations are conducted objectively and based on clear criteria can help to alleviate employee concerns and maintain trust in management.
Furthermore, a workplace culture that values recoverability from mistakes can help organizations cope with the uncertainty of work facing new work styles during the pandemic.
Finally, work-life balance and job control are always crucial in mitigating the adverse impacts of the pandemic on high-stress risk and occupational mental health.
New Delhi CNN Business —
Foxconn, one of Apple’s largest suppliers, is wrestling with major disruption at its biggest iPhone assembly factory in China, as anxious workers reportedly flee the locked-down facility, according to social media videos.
The Taiwanese company is racing to control a Covid outbreak at its campus in the central Chinese city of Zhengzhou.
On Wednesday, authorities imposed a seven-day lockdown of the area that houses the Foxconn plant, an order that could hit the iPhone assembler’s production and shipments.
The lockdown and the exodus are putting tremendous strain on Foxconn just before the key holiday shopping season begins and highlights how the country’s stringent zero-Covid policy is hurting international business.
“[We] fully understand your eagerness to go back home,” Foxconn told its employees over the weekend, according to a post on Zhengzhou government’s official WeChat account.
“For employees who voluntarily stay in the company’s factory area, the port government and the company will jointly ensure everyone’s…health and safety,” it added.
Analysts said the chaos at Zhengzhou could jeopardize Apple and Foxconn’s output in the coming weeks.
Ivan Lam, senior research analyst at Counterpoint, estimated that between 10% and 30% of iPhone 14 production could be affected in the near term if the situation did not stabilize.
The Zhengzhou campus is the world’s biggest iPhone factory and typically accounts for as much as 85% of iPhone assembly capacity, according to Lam’s estimates.
A Foxconn spokesperson told Chinese state media that the company is trying to boost production at other sites.
“At present, because now is the peak production season…
[there is] a large demand for workers,” a Foxconn spokesperson told Henan Daily on Monday, adding that the company was “also coordinating back-up production capacity at other sites.”
Foxconn and Apple did not respond to a request for comment from CNN.
Shares in Foxconn, also known as Hon Hai Precision Industry, fell 2.6% on Tuesday.
Quadrupling bonuses
Videos of many people leaving Zhengzhou on foot have gone viral on Chinese social media in recent days.
The city, which has a population of more than 12 million, imposed sweeping lockdown measures earlier last month after identifying dozens of Covid-19 cases.
State media has said that many Foxconn workers are among those walking miles to escape the city.
Calling it a “helpless move for some employees,” a Foxconn manager told media outlet Yicai that workers are panicking over the spread of the virus at the factory and lack of access to official information.
Foxconn said it was organizing vehicles for employees wishing to return home, according to a post on Zhengzhou government’s official WeChat account over the weekend.
The company has also quadrupled daily bonuses for workers at the plant this month, it said in a post on its official WeChat account on Tuesday.
While these disruptions will impact iPhone production in the near term, analysts say it may not dent Apple’s iPhone shipments in the key holiday season.
“I think in one to two weeks, things will get back to normal, given the current status,” Lam said.
“They still have a lot of alternative production sites,” he said, adding that Foxconn had already begun shifting production to other facilities in China, such as in the southern province of Guangdong.
“Things are under control now.”
And, as Beijing shows few signs of moving away from its rigid Covid policies, Apple has started to boost production in other countries, including India, to reduce its dependence on China.
Many factors have the potential to contribute to the induction and propagation of osteonecrosis of the jaw related to post COVID-19 infection.
The main factor is the virus itself, which causes ACE-2 downregulation and subsequent hyperinflammatory state, with elevated cytokines and immune dysregulation, in addition to microvascular thromboses and the hypercoagulability state [3, 4].
The second factor is the drugs used for the management of the hyperinflammatory syndrome and cytokine storm, which are the corticosteroids and the biological drugs like the Monoclonal Antibody Tocilizumab
[8, 9].
The third factor is the co-infections, which could be either bacterial or fungal secondary infections [10,11,12].
The fourth factor is the associated co-morbidities, especially diabetes, which further impair the local and innate body immunity [13, 14].
All these factors are directly linked to the development of jaw osteonecrosis, either independently or as a result of their interactions.
An arbitrary statement of these factors is presented in Fig. 4.
Fig.
4 Flowchart outlining potential Post-COVID-19 Related osteonecrosis of the Jaw (PC-RONJ) predisposing factors Full size image
This is a report of twelve SARS-CoV-2 infection-survived cases with manifestations of maxillary jaw osteonecrosis, which developed after the infectious course of the disease over various periods.
None of the patients had fungal infection, confirmed by negative preoperative fungal swab, negative histopathological reports, and the treatment consisted of surgical debridement and antibiotics without any antifungal medications.
The mean time until the diagnosis of osteonecrosis was 5.5 ± 2.43 weeks after recovery from SARS-CoV-2 infection.
This time frame is in accordance with Boymuradov et al., who reported a minimal elapsed period of 2 months after SARS-CoV-2 infection to develop the symptoms of osteonecrosis, and a maximum symptom-free period of 8 months [15].
All patients in this study received corticosteroids for the treatment of COVID-19.
Recent studies on COVID-19 recovered patients have shown the increased risk of developing osteonecrosis with the use of glucocorticoids [16, 17].
Daltro et al. (2020) conducted a literature review to assess the relationship between COVID-19 and osteonecrosis, where the findings of eleven studies related COVID-19 to osteonecrosis and the use of corticosteroids; therefore, they concluded that there is sufficient evidence for a corticosteroid-associated risk of avascular necrosis in patients with COVID-19
[18].
The unjustified utilization of corticosteroids as a component of the COVID-19 treatment protocol is a common practice without scientific support, especially in mild to moderate cases.
Moreover, Wang et al. conducted a meta-analysis to demonstrate the proportion and effect of corticosteroid therapy in patients with COVID-19 infection, where they deduced that a delayed viral clearance was a hallmark in patients with COVID-19 who received corticosteroid therapy with no clearly improved survival rate [19].
Therefore, the use of corticosteroids in the management of SARS-CoV-2 infection must be balanced between its advantage and post-infection drawbacks and complications.
As a result, the use of corticosteroids should be restricted to severe cases and only during acute respiratory symptoms.
All of the included patients have additional comorbidities; where all of them were diabetic.
Several reports have linked the association between COVID-19 in patients with diabetes with the occurrence of necrosis of the jaws and other bones [15, 18, 20, 21].
Microvascular angiopathy is a well stated complication of diabetes, which impairs bone nutrition through loss of full function of the nutrient vessels in bone.
Increased blood sugar level has a direct effect on white blood cells chemotaxis and phagocytosis, which subsequently improves viral binding affinity and reduce virus clearance
[18, 20].
Shin et al. (2020) reported that physicians should manage diabetes with proactive strategies to minimize the risk of medical complications in SARS-CoV-2 affected patients [20].
Interestingly, all of the reported cases which considered to have a potential relationship between COVID-19 and osteonecrosis of the jaw were exclusively found in the maxilla.
This may be attributed to the close proximity to the nasal mucosa and maxillary sinus.
Furthermore, the high expression of ACE-2 receptors in the nasal and oral mucosa epithelial cells may act as a vital risk factor for the occurrence of decreased blood supply [5, 6].
It is speculated that a sinusitis-induced osteomyelitis is the commencement point for this aggressive condition as SARS-CoV-2 is a respiratory tract infection.
Bagaria (2021), in an attempt to explain those peculiar orthopedic post-COVID manifestations, postulated that aggressive SARS-CoV-2 infection depletes immune defense mechanism, which leaves the patient vulnerable to infection episodes.
This phenomenon is called ‘Consumption Immuno-compromisation’.
In his report, Bagaria (2021) reported the occurrence of two cases of spontaneous osteonecrosis of the long bone and two cases of acute primary septic joint, along with a high rate of postoperative infection [22].
All of the bony manifestations that are encountered in this study developed spontaneously, without any provoking events.
This spontaneous incidence of bone necrosis is a cause of concern and should be a point of additional analysis.
Several authors have reported the spontaneous occurrence of jawbone necrosis without any precipitating events or predisposing factors [23, 24].
Khominsky and Lim (2018) conducted a systematic review of the spontaneous occurrence of Medication-Related Osteonecrosis of the Jaw (MRONJ), where they concluded that the “spontaneous” nomenclature is a misnomer as most of the literature-reported cases are the sequelae of low-grade trauma to thin susceptible mucosa covering anatomical regions at-risk areas [23].
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first series of reported cases with maxillary osteonecrosis following SARS-CoV-2 infection.
This article is limited by its observational pilot nature and limited sample size.
The exact pathogenesis of jaw necrosis, and whether the virus contributing effect alone can initiate pathological vascular necrosis without the ramifying effect of steroid therapy or patients comorbidity are topics for future research.
Furthermore; the decrease in blood supply to the affected hard and soft tissues of the maxilla could not be evaluated in this study.
A prophylactic approach should be presented for the early detection of bone osteonecrosis by the assessment of the vasculature of the maxillary hard and soft tissues in suspected patients.
Finally, several recurring risk factors must be built before considering a patient to have PC-RONJ.
A recent SARS-CoV-2 infection with concurrent cumulative corticosteroid prescription, systematic co-morbid conditions, no history of current or previous radiotherapy, antiresorptive, or antiangiogenic agents intake all of which are considered as precipitating factors for the occurrence of un-provoked jawbone osteonecrosis.
A practical guidelines is called for the prevention, diagnosis, and management of jaw osteonecrosis in patients with recent SARS-CoV-2 infection.
With the increasing rate of COVID-19, the general dentists and oral and maxillofacial surgeons must be best prepared and positioned for the early identification and prevention of PC-RONJ to avoid permeant deformity.
There is a need for communication between oral and maxillofacial surgeons and physicians to reduce the severity and the vast degree of avoidable morbidity that may occur as a consequence of an unjustified corticosteroid prescription, where they can modify the COVID-19 treatment protocol.
A specialized follow-up plan for the early detection of PC-RONJ should be proposed for patients at risk of developing osteonecrosis, as the spontaneous nature of this condition occurs with silent impact.
Despite continuing surges in COVID cases, death rates have fallen considerably as California’s vaccination rate has climbed.
And now that the CDC has recommended vaccines for young children, virtually all Californians can soon get vaccinated.
As vaccines have become widely available, some—but not all—of the troubling disparities in COVID-related death rates that we saw earlier in the pandemic have narrowed.
Since the start of the pandemic, more than 91,000 Californians have died from COVID-19, which translates to about 230 deaths per 100,000 people.
According to statewide data, death rates peaked around January 2021 and then began to decline in March 2021, as vaccines became more widely available.
Older Californians (over age 65) have considerably higher death rates, though deaths among this group have declined substantially since vaccines became widespread.
A surge in cases at the beginning of 2022 led to another uptick in death rates among older Californians but were nearly a third lower (64 per 100,000 compared to 176 per 100,000) than the previous peak—underscoring the efficacy of vaccines in preventing serious illness and death.
In addition, death rates for Black and Latino Californians have been higher than rates for white and Asian Californians.
In the first few months of the pandemic, Black Californians saw the highest death rates among major racial/ethnic groups.
By August 2020, however, the death rate for Latinos had surpassed other groups—and, at the peak of pandemic deaths, about 55 Latinos per 100,000 adults died in January 2021, compared to 45 deaths for Black Californians, 38 deaths for white Californians and 33 deaths for Asian Californians per 100,000 adults.
Higher Latino death rates have been attributed to crowded housing conditions among Latinos, higher shares of Latinos who are essential workers, and lower levels of access to vaccines among Latinos early on.
However, as Latino vaccination rates have risen over the past year, the gap in death rates relative to whites has closed.
Still, nearly 40,000 Latinos have died due to COVID, and their overall COVID death rate remains about 20% higher than the death rate of white Californians.
Unfortunately, Black Californians continue to have elevated mortality rates.
While vaccination rates are relatively low among Black Californians, especially in younger age groups, many other factors likely contribute to the continued disparity—including higher rates of poverty, distrust of the health care system, and other structural factors.
The success of vaccination campaigns, especially in Latino communities, has clearly paid dividends.
However, more community engagement is needed, especially among Black Californians, who continue to suffer high death rates.
In the most recent surge, white Californians also had elevated risk of death, as their vaccination rates have stalled.
Even as cases rise once again, COVID-19 is less of a concern than it used to be for most Californians; this could make it more challenging to get more people vaccinated and boosted.
This study is the first to investigate the effect of climatic factors such as rainfall, temperature, humidity, wind speed and sunshine duration on the daily reported number of COVID-19 cases using different lag times (ranging from 0 to 14 days) in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
We found some climatic factors, at lag periods prior to the detection of infection, had a significant effect on COVID-19 case frequency.
Although study limitations need to be taken into consideration when interpreting these findings, it showed that there are opportunities for policymakers to incorporate climatic data in COVID-19 transmission management plans.
Study limitations include the lack of data on the impact of other key climatic and non-climatic factors which might influence COVID-19 transmissions such as testing capacity, sanitization attitudes, public isolation policies, population density, population mobility, population immunity, ultraviolet light intensity, hospital admissions, air pollutant, and air quality index.
The other limitation was that the study was conducted in Addis Ababa only and did not cover other parts of the country.
Our study found that a 1% increase in relative humidity was significantly associated with a 1.1% and 1.2% reduced COVID-19 caseload at 4 and 5 lag days prior to COVID-19 detection.
This finding is consistent with a previous study conducted in the USA which found that the minimum and maximum significant effect of relative humidity on COVID-19 cases were observed between lag 3–6 days23.
Similarly, our results are in agreement with other studies that show high humidity reduces COVID-19 transmission17.
In contrast, a study conducted in 16 countries in Africa, demonstrated that a 1% increase in relative humidity reduced the COVID-19 incidence rate by 3.6% on the same day (lag 0)11.
Our study also showed that average temperature and sunshine duration were not significantly associated with the transmission of COVID-19 outbreaks, for the entire cumulative lag days during the study period in Addis Ababa.
Studies in South Africa, Canada, Australia, and Pakistan also reported a non-significant association between temperature and COVID-19 incidence14,24,25,26.
In contrast to these findings, studies conducted in India and Bangladesh found that increasing temperature was significantly associated with increasing number of COVID-19 cases12,27.
The variations across studies may reflect the differences in the impacts of temperature on COVID-19 transmission between climatic zones.
A significant direct relationship between wind speed and the transmission of COVID-19 in Addis Ababa was also observed in our study.
A 1 m/s increase in wind speed was associated with 1.8 times increase in COVID-19 confirmed cases.
Wind speed is likely to increase the circulation of suspended respiratory droplets in the air and it may also influence the spread distance and diffusion rate of the virus.
Similar findings that report a direct effect of wind speed on COVID-19 transmission were reported in other studies27,28,29,30,31.
In contrast to these findings, an inverse relationship13,32,33 and a non-significant relationship13 between wind speed and COVID-19 transmission have been reported in previous studies.
The study rainfall analysis shows a 1 mm increase in rainfall is associated with 1.078 times increase in the daily number of COVID-19 cases, at a lag of 14 days.
Our results are in agreement with studies undertaken in the USA that reported precipitation had a significant effect on COVID-19 cases until the rainfall reached 50.26 mm for all cumulative lag effects23.
Another study undertaken in the USA found daily COVID-19 cases to increase with increasing rainfall between 32 and 44 mm but for case incidence to decrease over 44.9 mm34.
However, the associational effect revealed that rainfall had a significant direct effect on COVID-19 cases for all lag periods except for the day of COVID-19 detection and 1 lag day.
With increased cumulative effects of rainfall and wind speed (prior to detection of COVID-19 cases), the number of positive COVID-19 cases significantly increased over the study area as compared with the rest of the variables included in the model.
This means that when rainfall and wind speed are taken into consideration together there is an increased cumulative effect of COVID-19 cases.
Our study results align with research undertaken in India that shows weather factors such as rain and wind increase COVID-19 transmission as lag days increase35.
Although we did not have data to justify the scientific background regarding the impacts of climate factors on COVID-19, previous experimental studies showed that SARS-CoV-2 persistence on surfaces or in the air is sensitive to temperature, humidity, and ultraviolet light6,7.
Environmentally sensitive respiratory viruses show seasonal transmission that coincides with changes in temperature, humidity, and solar radiation.
Therefore, like other viruses with a lipid envelope, SARS-CoV-2 is probably sensitive to temperature, humidity, and solar radiation; this affects its ability to persist on surfaces and in the air and might have subtle impacts on transmission.
In our study, COVID-19 prevalence shows seasonal variation with the highest number of cases reported between June and September (i.e., during the main rainy season) and between March and May (i.e., during the second rainy season).
The lowest number of COVID-19 cases was reported between October and January (i.e., during the dry seasons).
The seasonal variations in COVID-19 cases coincide with the seasonal variation in climatic factors such as relative humidity, rainfall, and wind speed.
The findings of our study show climatic factors have a significant effect on the transmission of COVID-19 in Addis Ababa.
Intensive public awareness campaigns and governmental decisions that regulate the rate of mass gatherings are required during peak COVID-19 transmission seasons36.
Policy implication
The findings of this study provided important information for policymakers to consider climatic factors when designing various preventive measures such as vaccination, social distancing and distributing personal protective equipment for the control and prevention of COVID-19 transmission in the community.
For instance, the seasonal patterns of COVID-19 infections suggested that measures to limit the spread of COVID-19 infection should be targeted at specific times of the year with the highest transmission risk occurring for a maximum impact.
Using climatic data, policymakers can also predict the future burden of COVID-19 and can identify a high-risk area for targeted interventions.
Although several studies have examined the transmission dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic in different parts of the world37,38, evidence is still scarce and mostly limited to a few countries, particularly in Africa.
Thus, our study provides additional information to understand the complex interactions between climatic factors and COVID-19 transmission in the Ethiopian Capital City (Addis Ababa), which reported the highest number of COVID-19 cases during the pandemic.
Our results indicated that COVID-19 transmission was mostly related to three main climatic factors (humidity, rainfall, and wind speed) and COVID-19 cases have shown seasonal variations with the highest number of cases reported during the rainy season and the lowest number of cases reported during the dry season.
The results of this study support some previous findings about the main climatic determinants of COVID-19 transmission39,40, which may be useful for decision-making and management of the disease.
A lesser known but equally crucial dimension in managing and responding to an epidemic is social sciences in health, which can shed light on populations' understanding, perception and acceptance of the risks associated with diseases.
The COVID-19 pandemic is no exception.
As the disease spread across the planet, clear differences in perception by populations were observed in different countries, creating fertile ground for investigation for researchers specializing in social sciences applied to health.
Social sciences are a series of academic disciplines (anthropology, sociology, communication, economics, etc.) whose common thread is the study of human societies and social interactions between individuals, groups and their environments.
During the Ebola epidemic in 2015, healthcare procedures and safe burial management went against certain cultural and religious practices, creating very high levels of mistrust among populations regarding healthcare interventions and those responsible for them.
Social sciences in health became an essential factor in the successful management of the Ebola epidemic: research into the perception and degree of acceptability of certain treatments and practices by a given population was used as a basis for dialog with the aim of organizing the most appropriate response to specific needs and contexts.
The importance of giving population groups a say in their perceptions of the COVID-19 epidemic
For the past twenty years, researchers in social sciences have been looking into issues related to epidemic preparedness and response (especially perceptions: of disease, testing, social distancing measures and vaccination, the impact of misinformation or rumors, etc.) and providing support to health authorities in developing responses to potential disease outbreaks.
Initial research focused on social issues related to people with HIV: perception, stigmatization, adherence to treatment, etc.
Studies in the area of social sciences in health are mainly carried out nationwide, but it can be worthwhile expanding their scope to a larger scale.
The aim of the REPAIR program (International Pasteurian Research Program in Response to Coronavirus in Africa) conducted since 2020 in 10 African institutes in the Pasteur Network is to improve understanding of SARS-CoV-2 circulation on the African continent.
The social sciences part of the project particularly focuses on testing and the way in which it is understood and experienced by three categories of people in four countries: healthcare professionals, individuals who have been tested and the general population.
The REPAIR project applies the same research protocol to four members of the Pasteur Network (Côte d'Ivoire, Madagascar, Niger and Tunisia) with different environments and political, epidemiological and cultural contexts, with the aim of performing a comparative socio-anthropological study.
"It is crucial to have a common framework within which to draft guidelines for health authorities, but we have given ourselves a degree of flexibility to take account of national particularities," explains Dr. Chiarella Mattern, Head of the Health and Social Sciences group within the Epidemiology and Clinical Research Unit at the Institut Pasteur de Madagascar in charge of the social sciences component of the REPAIR project.
The aim of the study is to collect qualitative data through in-depth interviews with those affected by the issues at hand.
Each institute (CERMES Niger, Institut Pasteur de Côte d'Ivoire, Institut Pasteur de Madagascar and Institut Pasteur de Tunis) interviewed three groups of people: healthcare workers, people who had been tested, and the general population.
Healthcare workers shared their experience of COVID-19, healthcare practices, difficulties encountered in tackling the disease, vaccination and the impact of the epidemic on their daily lives.
People who had been tested spoke about their understanding and perception of testing.
The interviews with the general population will provide data on knowledge about COVID-19, the application and practice of screening, and experiences of the preventive measures introduced by the different governments.
The Institut Pasteur de Madagascar, the Institut Pasteur de Côte d'Ivoire and the Institut Pasteur de Tunis have now finished gathering data and are in the data entry phase.
CERMES Niger is slightly further ahead and is drafting an initial report.
These data can only be fully understood when seen within the respective national contexts of the epidemic.
Each of the four institutes has therefore agreed to produce a timeline of major events (border closures, dates of lockdowns, etc.), compiled using press reviews and an analysis of speeches by health authorities.
All the results will be published in summer 2022.
The first network for social sciences in health in the Pasteur Network
Just two institutes in the Pasteur Network have a structured team in social sciences applied to health: the Institut Pasteur in Paris and the Institut Pasteur de Madagascar.
Over the past ten years, several research projects in health humanities have been developed within the Pasteur Network, touching on a wide variety of topics: maternal and infant health, infectious diseases, etc.
The REPAIR project, which has a dedicated social sciences component, has provided an opportunity to formalize this working framework.
It is crucial that all health humanities researchers, most of whom are isolated in their countries, can get to know their counterparts in the Pasteur Network and develop a network of expertise.
Initially, the aim is to identify key people, to determine individual needs (training, networking, etc.) and to share experiences (research topics, funding bodies, partners, methodologies used).
On this basis, the idea is then to form a structured network of researchers in social sciences applied to health within the Pasteur Network, so as to boost opportunities to develop research by fostering a stimulating environment for scientific dialog on shared research questions.
"In recent years, the outbreaks of Ebola, plague in Madagascar in 2017, and COVID-19 have highlighted the importance of our discipline in terms of preparedness and response to the social dimensions of epidemics, especially the need to analyze the factors governing the success or failure of public health interventions and to analyze rumors and the demand for care.
Given the impact that individual health-related behaviors can have on the success of public health interventions, it is crucial to incorporate anthropological research into work on epidemic preparedness and response, and in health research in general," concludes Dr. Mattern.
Linda Butler-Johnson, a 61-year-old widow, hasn’t had steady work for two years, not since she was laid off from her housekeeper job at a Washington, D.C. hotel in the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Her rent was paid by a city rental assistance program all last year.
But in 2022 she’s on her own, with no steady income.
After a year of unemployment Moshi Bernard, 36, has a job as a librarian earning $20,000 less than she made in the finance department of a local hotel before the pandemic.
She’s glad to have a job, but the big pay cut is hard to swallow.
“Is it a step back?
Yes,” she said.
“Is it a lower pay?
Yes.
But is it steady and consistent?
Yes.”
Two years into the pandemic and multiple variants that have resulted in one million deaths across the U.S., Black Americans are still suffering from COVID-19’s public health and economic consequences.
The recovery of most people of color has been sporadic and uneven.
From permanently closed businesses to limited access to health care, housing and food insecurity, increases in suicide and violent crime and educational setbacks, experts say it will take years before Black Americans are able to fully recover from the pandemic.
Using the CVIC tool, Lao PDR has costed five scenarios of COVID-19 vaccine introduction with non-annualized, incremental, financial costs ranging from US$6.44 million to US$14.80 million, equivalent to 1.32 to 3.04% of the total government health expenditure of Lao PDR in 2019, and 0.03 to 0.08% of Lao PDR’s gross domestic product [28].
Including teenagers and children in the vaccination programme increases the coverage from 58 to 70.9% and 86.5%, respectively, and introducing two booster doses decreases the cost per dose from US$0.8 to US$0.6.
Since no new healthcare workers were needed to be hired, based on NDVP, and the per diem rates were conservatively applied, the financial cost on human resources from this cost analysis were relatively small.
However, it is also worth noting that there are opportunity costs in redeploying existing healthcare workers.
As expected, increasing the vaccination coverage, the costs of vaccine delivery and demand generation and communications increased.
Comparing to vaccinating adults only, introducing COVID-19 vaccine to teenagers would increase the costs on oversight and assurance, and vaccine safety and surveillance.
More oversight and more resources on vaccine safety surveillance are needed to vaccinate teenagers.
Capital spending on cold storage drove the costs if it was not annualized.
However, the refrigerators can be used for more than a year.
When these costs were annualized, operational expenditure on cold chain and costs on data management, oversight, monitoring and evaluation played a larger contribution to the total costs.
Also, the refrigerators can also be used to store other vaccines but shared costs were not considered so the cost estimated may be overestimated.
The majority of the primary courses were administered in the second half of 2021 so manpower required for primary courses also peaks at the time.
If booster doses are introduced, the number of healthcare workers required would peak in the first half of 2022.
Most healthcare workers were allocated to work at fixed sites with cold storage equipment for adults and teenagers.
After introducing the vaccine to children, more healthcare workers would be needed for fixed sites without cold storage equipment.
When boosters were introduced, the needs of outreach increased.
The estimated COVID-19 vaccine delivery costs per primary course in Lao PDR (US$0.6–0.81) were lower than those in Ghana (US$4.5–4.6) and Kenya (US$4.28–3.29), where published comprehensive costing was available [11, 12].
The per diem for one healthcare worker, unit costs of personal protective equipment and transportation in Ghana were higher than those in Lao PDR but Lao PDR has higher unit costs of local data management and monitoring, and demand generation and communication.
The numbers of healthcare workers required per primary course were similar in Ghana and Lao PDR.
A comprehensive costing exercise of a new vaccine introduction can be useful, especially during public health emergencies.
Vaccine procurement cost usually drives the vaccination programme cost, but obtaining vaccine delivery cost estimates can help refine delivery strategies, such as coverage goal, target population, delivery modalities, and minimize the financial needs and burden to the existing health systems, with a better budgeting plan at an initial phase of the deployment process.
The CVIC tool provides a list of data required and prepopulated data as reference for countries to obtain cost estimates in a structured way for their effective and timely planning and resource mobilization, and allows for the incorporation of different delivery scenarios by cost driver typology, whether it be by capital, human resource or other recurrent variables, such as training, service delivery, monitoring, etc. Countries can use the tool to fit their needs such as seen in the case in Lao PDR where there was a request to estimate the costs of boosters; for scenario analyses to determine an appropriate vaccination strategy; and for costing out the NDVP.
In Lao PDR, the cost estimates from the CVIC tool were used as inputs for the NDVP, and to inform national level planning and resource allocation.
Lao PDR eventually decided to vaccinate primary series and one initial booster for the priority population (including healthcare workers, older adults aged above 60 years, persons with underlying conditions and essential workers), all adults, teenagers and children aged 5 years and above; and second booster doses for all adults and teenagers aged 12 years and above.
The tool also helped the government understand the COVAX policy environment including potential cost sharing scenarios.
Based on the cost scenarios developed in the tool, the government took decisions on the level of external resources that needed to mobilize and to support outreach services.
The CVIC tool can aid in budgeting but also requires contribution from local authorities or experts on formulating efficient strategies in a local setting.
The delivery strategies for COVID-19 vaccination vary among countries and different delivery modalities would have different cost impacts and thus different implication to the immunization programme and health system.
Lao PDR vaccinates their target groups through fixed vaccination sites with and without cold storage equipment and outreach sites.
Some countries in Latin America deliver COVID-19 vaccines to the high-risk groups at the same time as influenza vaccine through the already established programmes [29].
In this situation, some costs could be shared with the influenza vaccination programme.
Other countries, particularly in Africa, rely on campaigns to deliver COVID-19 vaccines [30], which would increase the costs of per diems and transport for healthcare workers.
The Project Last Mile, a partnership between Coca-Cola company, donors and the governments in Africa, is an example of reducing costs and increasing efficiency of vaccine delivery in lower- and middle-income settings.
It helped accelerate COVID-19 vaccine distribution and communications in Africa vaccines using their logistics network and supply chain
[31].
The CVIC tool version 2.3 has several limitations.
First, it is not a micro-costing tool—sub-national specificity is not captured even if there is sub-national variation, for example, in the population size of provinces or districts.
Second, booster doses cannot be easily captured in the tool.
A separated Excel workbook of the tool can be an option for the booster dose.
Third, although a combination of vaccine products can be selected for one delivery modality, similar characteristics of vaccine products are required such as the number of doses and cold storage requirement.
In a costing exercise of COVID-19 vaccines in general, the difficulty in obtaining all necessary data limits the accuracy of the projection.
In addition, conducting the costing exercise at the same time with planning and rolling out the vaccines under a pandemic is also very challenging.
There are many uncertainties that may lead to a change of the vaccination plan.
Model input uncertainty should be handled with precaution.
A sensitivity analysis on varying lower and upper values of parameters would help in understanding the cost drivers.
The CVIC tool can produce upper and lower uncertainty bounds for the cost estimates by varying the healthcare worker time required to vaccinate one dose.
Also, the costing results may be difficult to catch up with the reality.
This also applies to the case in Lao PDR.
For the cost analysis in Lao PDR, the expected willingness to receive the vaccines is 100% which may be difficult to achieve in reality.
Last but not least, a cost analysis cannot provide insight on the health impact of the vaccine.
A cost-effectiveness or cost–benefit analysis would be useful to explore the incremental cost to gain a unit of a health outcome to support decision-making.
Every parent is likely familiar with the challenge of having a nasal swab taken from their child for a COVID-19 test.
A new study published in The Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA®), however, suggests that with proper instruction, children as young as four-years-old can effectively perform self-sampling with nasal swabs for testing.
Researchers enrolled 287 children at Atlanta-area sites in July and August 2021 to assess the ability of children ages four to 14 years to self-collect nasal samples by comparing swabs taken by the participants with swabs taken by health care workers (HCWs).
After hearing and seeing instructional materials, which included a short instructional YouTube video and a one-page handout, children self-sampled themselves, followed by the HCWs.
Both samples were then submitted to a clinical laboratory for PCR analysis.
The findings show that self-collected nasal swabs from children agreed with swabs collected by HCWs approximately 97% of the time for the detection of COVID-19.
A usability questionnaire, which was also included in the study, found that children younger than eight had more difficulty with sample collection but were still able to collect samples and were in concordance with HCWs.
“Seeing how closely the results line up between the children and trained health care workers is a strong indicator that these age groups are fully capable of swabbing themselves if given proper instruction,” says Jesse Waggoner, MD, an assistant professor of infectious diseases with the Emory University School of Medicine and one of the lead authors on the study.
This data, which are the first of its kind to evaluate the usability of self-collection tests from both the child and HCW perspective, show the potential for a widespread shift in COVID-19 testing strategies.
Prior to this study, the FDA had not authorized COVID-19 tests for self-swabbing by children under age 14.
Data from the study are now available to test manufacturers seeking authorization for pediatric self-collection.
”Pediatric self-swabbing will support expanded testing access and should make it even easier to test school age populations with fewer resources,” said Tim Stenzel, M.D., Ph.D., director of the Office of In Vitro Diagnostics at the FDA.
“This study furthers our knowledge of test accuracy with these types of samples and provides test manufacturers with data to support their EUA requests to the FDA.”
The data could also ease the burden on schools that grapple with conducting group testing of students due to the limited availability of trained health care workers to collect samples.
Beyond possible impacts for test manufacturers and group testing strategies, parents of school-age children can now be confident that their children have the capability to collect their own samples for PCR-based lab tests if the instructions for use are properly followed.
“Collecting nasal samples, especially when you have to do it multiple times in a short time span, can be an uncomfortable and stressful experience for young kids and being able to swab themselves can make things a bit easier,“ says Wilbur Lam, MD, pediatric hematologist and oncologist at Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center of Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, professor of the Emory University School of Medicine Department of Pediatrics and at the Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology and a senior author on the study.
“Maybe at the very least, these data can save parents from having to bribe their kids with an ice cream cone.”
This study was a collaboration between Emory University and Emory Healthcare, Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, the Georgia Institute of Technology, FDA and the National Institutes of Health's Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics (RADx ®)
Tech program, which is administered by the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB).
The research was supported by NIBIB (U54 EB027690-03S1 and U54 EB027690-03S2) and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (UL1 TR002378), both parts of the National Institutes of Health.
About the Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics (RADx®) initiative:
The RADx initiative was launched on April 29, 2020, to speed innovation in the development, commercialization, and implementation of technologies for COVID-19 testing.
The initiative has four programs: RADx Tech, RADx Advanced Technology Platforms, RADx Underserved Populations and RADx Radical.
It leverages the existing NIH Point-of-Care Technology Research Network.
The RADx initiative partners with federal agencies, including the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Health, Department of Defense, the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, and U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Learn more about the RADx initiative and its programs: https://www.nih.gov/radx.
Symptoms of the Omicron variant typically mimic cold symptoms, including congestion, coughing, and fatigue.
While Omicron symptoms are often milder than symptoms of other variants, they can vary widely, and more research is needed to determine whether Omicron can cause more serious illness than other variants.
The best protection from any COVID-19 strain is vaccination, booster shots, and wearing a mask in indoor public spaces.
On December 1, 2021—just a few days after the World Health Organization (WHO) declared it a variant of concern—the Omicron variant made its debut in the U.S. with its first confirmed case.
And in January 2022, the Omicron variant overtook Delta to become the global dominant COVID-19 strain, according to the WHO.
An April 2022 study published in Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy found that Omicron has more than 30 mutations in the spike gene—the part of the virus that allows it to penetrate your cells and infect you—and it's likely more transmissible than the original SARS-CoV-2.
When a new variant emerges, many questions arise about how it may differ from previous variants, including what symptoms it causes and whether it's more or less likely to cause severe illness.
Here's what we know so far about the symptoms of the Omicron variant, according to research and infectious disease experts.
What Are the Symptoms of the Omicron Variant?
The symptoms of the Delta variant are often like those of a very bad cold.
Based on a ZOE Health Study analysis of COVID-19 symptoms among infected people in London, the symptoms of the Omicron variant might not be too different.
That study compared the COVID-19 symptoms that people recorded during a week in October—before the Omicron variant was known to be in London—and a week in December—after the variant was confirmed to be in London.
During both weeks, the top five symptoms people reported were runny nose, headache, fatigue, sneezing, and sore throat.
"Hopefully, people now recognize the cold-like symptoms which appear to be the predominant feature of Omicron," Tim Spector, lead scientist of the study app behind the data, the ZOE COVID Study app, said in a press release.
"As our latest data shows, Omicron symptoms are predominantly cold symptoms, runny nose, headache, sore throat, and sneezing, so people should stay at home as it might well be COVID," Spector said.
Other common symptoms include nasal congestion, a dry cough, and aches (particularly lower back pain).
In the December 17, 2021, issue of Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) released an analysis of the first 43 cases of the Omicron variant that were reported in the U.S. That research showed that the most commonly reported symptoms among those patients were cough, fatigue, and congestion or runny nose.
So Does the Omicron Variant Only Cause Mild Symptoms?
A May 2022 review published in Medicine found that the Omicron variant causes far less severe infections compared to Delta and other variants.
Data from the ZOE COVID Study app found that those infected during the Omicron wave were 25% less likely to be admitted to the hospital than patients infected during the Delta wave.
While Omicron symptoms appear to be milder, Maria Van Kerkhove, the WHO's COVID-19 technical lead, said that Omicron symptoms can still vary widely.
"We know that people infected with Omicron can have the full spectrum of disease, from asymptomatic infection to mild disease, all the way to severe disease to death," Van Kerkhove said during a question-and-answer session, per CNBC.
Plus, it's still not yet clear whether Omicron truly causes "milder" symptoms than other strains.
According to Mohammad Sobhanie, MD, an infectious disease physician at The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, it is possible that Omicron could result in different or milder symptoms than previous variants.
But that may have more to do with people's vaccination status than the virus itself—because more people than ever are vaccinated, it's possible Omicron just seems milder.
Being fully vaccinated, and especially boosted, reduces the chances a person will experience any COVID-19 symptoms at all—but as we've learned by now, it's possible to get a breakthrough infection, or an infection when you're fully vaccinated or even boosted, according to the CDC.
When fully vaccinated and boosted people experience COVID-19 symptoms, they may be milder and shorter in duration, Dr. Sobhanie said.
"We know that even with breakthrough infections, vaccinated people are less likely to get sick, and if they do get sick, they have a far lower chance of hospitalization and death," Dr. Sobhanie added.
Also, early outbreaks of Omicron have been among young adults who tend to have milder infections anyway, as well as among those who are more likely to have antibody protection through vaccination or previous infection, Anne Liu, MD, an infectious disease physician with Stanford Health Care, told Health.
It's also important to keep in mind that with every new variant, there's a lag between infections and hospitalizations, so a variant can initially seem less concerning than it actually may be.
"Whenever there is a new variant, people say cases are going up but not hospitalizations, but we seem to forget that there's a lag of several weeks before we know if these cases will result in more hospitalizations and deaths," Dr. Liu said.
More data is needed to conclude if Omicron infections cause more severe illness or death compared to infections with other variants and how effective vaccines are against severe illness, hospitalizations, and deaths.
To gather more information, the CDC is closely monitoring real-world vaccine effectiveness and breakthrough infections, as well as Omicron's impact on disease incidence, severity, and vaccine breakthrough.
How Can I Protect Myself Against Omicron?
Experts continue to learn more about the Omicron variant and its specific risks (including any new symptoms, especially in unvaccinated people, and how much protection the vaccines provide).
But it's important to be aware of existing COVID-19 symptoms and to stay home if you feel ill (even if it just seems like you have a cold).
The CDC says COVID-19 may cause the following symptoms:
Fever or chills
Cough
Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
Fatigue
Muscle or body aches
Headache
New loss of taste or smell
Sore throat
Congestion or runny nose
Nausea or vomiting
Diarrhea
To protect yourself and others from severe sickness from any COVID-19 strain, Dr. Liu said the best thing to do is get fully vaccinated.
And if you're already fully vaccinated, getting booster shots can provide further protection.
If you have children who are eligible, it may be best to prioritize getting them vaccinated also.
Even if you're fully vaccinated, the CDC recommends wearing a mask in indoor public transportation settings, but you can choose to wear a mask at any time.
If you're getting together with people you don't live with, then Dr. Liu suggests everyone take a rapid COVID-19 test at home to prevent asymptomatic spread (ideally, take a rapid test the same day of the gathering).
2. Experiences of GCSE students during coronavirus (COVID-19)
Overview
The analysis presented in this article includes young people attending state comprehensive, grammar, and independent schools, who were in Year 11 in the 2020 to 2021 academic year.
During the data collection period, September 2021 to March 2022, the students were in Year 12 or the first year of further education.
The Income Deprivation Affecting Children Index (IDACI) has been used to assess deprivation.
IDACI measures the proportion of all children aged 0 to 15 years living in income deprived families.
Throughout the article, we refer to differences between the most and least deprived areas, which refer to the top 20% and bottom 20% deprived small areas in England.
For more information, see Section 4: Glossary.
Lockdown learning
This section explores the education and learning experiences of young people during the first and third national lockdown periods in England.
The first national lockdown in this article refers to the period April to July 2020, however some schools may have been closed outside of this period.
From 23 March 2020, schools in Great Britain were closed for most students, except for children of critical workers or vulnerable children who could not be safely cared for at home.
End of year examinations were cancelled.
The second national lockdown took place during November 2020.
From 5 November 2020, non-essential high street businesses were closed, and people were prohibited from meeting others outside of their “support bubble” in indoor spaces.
However, schools remained open, and therefore this period was not included as part of this study.
The third national lockdown refers to the period January to March 2021.
From 4 January 2021, the Prime Minister announced another lockdown in England, with rules similar to those in March 2020.
Schools were closed from the following day, however remained open for children of critical workers or vulnerable children.
End of year examinations were once again cancelled, as there was no guarantee that schools would reopen before the summer holidays.
During the first national lockdown, 4 in 10 (40%) students attended school in person, if only for a few days or on a part-time basis.
There were no significant differences in in-person school attendance between the five deprivation groups.
During the third national lockdown, just under one in five (17%) students attended school in person, and there were clear differences across deprivation groups, with a significantly higher proportion of students in the most deprived areas having attended school in person, compared with those in the least deprived areas (21% and 13%, respectively).
The reduction in numbers by the third lockdown may be because parents or guardians adapted to home schooling and remote learning, allowing their children to study at home.
The young people in this study were also a year older during this period, and therefore may have been more able to stay home to continue their education.
Figure 1: A lower proportion of students attended school in person during the third lockdown, with those in the most deprived areas being more likely to attend compared with less deprived areas Proportion of students in England attending school in person during lockdowns, September 2021 to March 2022 Source: COVID Social Mobility and Opportunities (COSMO) study dataset from the University College London, Sutton Trust and Kantar Public Download this chart Figure 1: A lower proportion of students attended school in person during the third lockdown, with those in the most deprived areas being more likely to attend compared with less deprived areas Image
.csv .xls
Two-thirds (66%) of young people said their school provided real-time online learning for subject lessons during the first lockdown, with no differences identified across deprivation groups.
During the third lockdown period, there was an increase across all deprivation groups, with around 9 in 10 (87%) young people reporting that their school had provided real-time online learning.
Young people in the most deprived areas were less likely to report this (81%) compared with those in the least deprived areas (93%).
This might suggest schools in less deprived areas faced fewer barriers in improving their online provision compared with schools in more deprived areas.
Figure 2: Students in the most deprived areas were less likely than those in the least deprived areas to be provided with online learning for subject lessons during the third lockdown Proportion of students in England with access to online learning for subject lessons during lockdowns, September 2021 to March 2022 Source: COVID Social Mobility and Opportunities (COSMO) study dataset from the University College London, Sutton Trust and Kantar Public Download this chart Figure 2: Students in the most deprived areas were less likely than those in the least deprived areas to be provided with online learning for subject lessons during the third lockdown Image
.csv .xls
Young people who reported that their school had provided real-time online learning for subject lessons were asked, on average, how many live lessons they attended.
During the first lockdown, 55% of all young people reported attending three or more lessons per day, with no significant differences between deprivation groups.
However, during the third lockdown, a lower proportion of young people in the most deprived areas reported attending three or more lessons per day (64%) compared with those in the least deprived areas (72%).
Figure 3: Students in the most deprived areas were less likely to report attending three or more online lessons per day compared with those in the least deprived areas during the third lockdown Proportion of students in England whose school provided online learning attending three or more online lessons per day during lockdowns, September 2021 to March 2022 Source: COVID Social Mobility and Opportunities (COSMO) study dataset from the University College London, Sutton Trust and Kantar Public Download this chart Figure 3: Students in the most deprived areas were less likely to report attending three or more online lessons per day compared with those in the least deprived areas during the third lockdown Image
.csv .xls
Most students reported having access to a suitable device to complete online work at the start of the first and third national lockdowns in England (86% and 89%, respectively).
However, there were clear differences in access to devices between deprivation groups, where a lower proportion of students in the most deprived areas reported having access to a suitable device (such as a laptop, tablet or Chromebook) to access online work (78% at the start of the first lockdown and 83% at the start of the third lockdown), compared with those in the least deprived areas (94% and 95%, respectively).
Additionally, having to share devices with other family members was reported as a barrier to remote learning by 13% and 9% of all students during the first and third lockdowns.
Young people living in the most deprived areas were more likely to report this during the first (15%) and third (11%) lockdown, compared with those in the least deprived areas (9% and 6%, respectively).
Perhaps indicative of these disparities in access to suitable devices, young people in the most deprived areas were more likely to be provided with digital devices by their school throughout the first (41%) and third (45%) lockdown periods, compared with students in the least deprived areas (15% and 16%, respectively).
Figure 4: Students in the most deprived areas were least likely to have access to suitable devices to complete work, but were most likely to be provided with devices by their school Proportion of students in England reporting having access to suitable devices and provision of devices by their school, September 2021 to March 2022 Source: COVID Social Mobility and Opportunities (COSMO) study dataset from the University College London, Sutton Trust and Kantar Public Download this chart Figure 4: Students in the most deprived areas were least likely to have access to suitable devices to complete work, but were most likely to be provided with devices by their school Image
.csv .xls
When looking at the barriers to remote learning experienced by young people, we found the most reported barrier during both lockdown periods was feeling unmotivated and struggling to engage with studies or work (reported by 66% in the first lockdown and 59% in the third lockdown).
Students living in the most deprived areas were less likely to report this in the first and third lockdown (61% and 54%, respectively) than those in the least deprived areas (70% and 61%, respectively).
Figure 5: Young people in more deprived areas were less likely to report struggling with motivation as a learning barrier, compared with those in less deprived areas Proportion of students in England reporting feeling unmotivated as a barrier to remote learning during lockdowns, September 2021 to March 2022 Source: COVID Social Mobility and Opportunities (COSMO) study dataset from the University College London, Sutton Trust and Kantar Public Download this chart Figure 5: Young people in more deprived areas were less likely to report struggling with motivation as a learning barrier, compared with those in less deprived areas Image
.csv .xls
Overall, not having a suitable or quiet space to study during the first and third lockdowns was reported by 17% and 16% of all students, respectively.
Students living in the most deprived areas were more likely to report this barrier during the first and third lockdown periods (21% and 20%, respectively), when compared with those in the least deprived areas (13% and 11%, respectively).
Similar data collected from our Opinions and Lifestyle Survey during the first lockdown found that among those whose eldest or only child (aged 16 to 18 years) was struggling to continue their education at home, 60% said that their child was struggling with a lack of motivation at home, while 20% reported that their child struggled with having a quiet space for studying.
During the third lockdown, these data showed that 71% of adults reported a lack of motivation among their children, with 11% reporting lack of quiet space for studying.
These findings may suggest that the outcomes of those living in the most deprived areas were driven by the challenges and barriers faced, rather than an absence of motivation.
For more information on these data, please see our Coronavirus and homeschooling in Great Britain:
April to June 2020 article.
Further analysis on lockdown learning can be found in COSMO’s Briefing No. 1 – Lockdown Learning article.
Education catch-up and recovery
Young people were asked about the disruption to their education as a result of the coronavirus pandemic and how much they agreed or disagreed with a range of statements regarding their education catch-up.
Around 8 in 10 (79%) young people reported they agreed that their progress in Year 11 had suffered because of the disruption caused by coronavirus, with similar rates found across deprivation groups.
However, those living in the most deprived areas were more likely to hold the perception that they had fallen behind their classmates as a result of the coronavirus pandemic (42%), compared with those in the least deprived areas (26%).
Young people living in the most deprived areas were less likely to agree that they felt prepared for the education, job, or training course when they started in September 2021 (34%), and that they had been able to catch up on learning they had missed as a result of the pandemic (33%), compared with those in the least deprived areas (43% and 39%, respectively).
Figure 6: Students in the most deprived areas were more likely to report they had fallen behind their classmates due to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic
Proportions of students in England who agreed with the following statements around catch-up concerns, September 2021 to March 2022
Embed code Embed this interactive Copy
Download this chart
.xlsx
Among young people who had attended school in person at any point during their final year, those in the most deprived areas of England were more likely to report that their school had offered the following catch-up activities when compared with those in the least deprived areas:
extra one-to-one or individual tuition or support (31% and 24%, respectively)
extra tuition or support in pairs or small groups (39% and 29%, respectively)
additional classes during school holidays or at weekends (33% and 19%, respectively)
Where these activities were offered by schools, a higher proportion of those living in the most deprived areas also reported taking up the offer when compared with those in the least deprived areas.
Young people in the most deprived areas were around twice as likely to take up the offer of extra one-to-one tuition (19%) compared with those in the least deprived areas (9%), while 26% of students in the most deprived areas reported taking up the offer of extra group tuition, compared with 18% of those in the least deprived areas.
In addition, those in the most deprived areas were more likely to take up the offer of additional in-person classes or support on top of their usual timetable (29%) compared with those in the least deprived areas (24%).
Figure 7: Students in the most deprived areas were more likely to take up the offer of activities in their final year to catch-up on missed or disrupted learning due to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic
Proportion of students in England taking up catch-up activities in schools during Year 11, September 2021 to March 2022
Embed code Embed this interactive Copy
Download this chart
.xlsx
Young people were also asked how they felt their overall motivation to study and learn had been affected by the disruption to schools and colleges caused by coronavirus.
Around half of young people (51%) reported feeling less motivated to learn and study because of the pandemic, while 25% reported feeling more motivated.
Students living in the most deprived areas were more likely to report feeling more motivated to study (27%) as a result of the disruption compared with those in the least deprived areas (23%).
Further analysis on education catch-up and recovery can be found in COSMO’s Briefing No. 2 – Education recovery and catch-up article.
Future plans and aspirations
Young people were asked about information, advice and guidance (IAG) they may have received to assist in making decisions about their future.
Students living in the most deprived areas of England were less likely to have accessed school-based IAG (66%) when compared with those in the least deprived areas (73%).
Similar to the school-based IAG, those in the most deprived areas were less likely to receive informal advice from their parent or guardian, sibling, other family members, friends, or others (89%) when compared with those in the least deprived areas (95%).
Young people were asked how likely it is that they will ever apply to university to do a degree.
Around 7 in 10 (71%)
students said they thought it was likely they would apply, with rates lower for those in the most deprived areas (65%) compared with the least deprived (77%).
Among those who said they were likely to apply to university, students in the most deprived areas have less confidence in their likelihood of getting into university, with 11% saying it is unlikely compared with 4% of those in the least deprived areas.
These figures are slightly below pre-pandemic levels, where data from the Sutton Trust in 2019 (PDF, 486KB) indicated that 77% of students aged 11 to 16 years in England and Wales reported they would be likely to go into higher education when they are old enough.
When young people were asked what they would most likely be doing in two years’ time, more than half (54%) said they would be studying full-time for a degree or other qualification.
This was reported by fewer students in the most deprived areas (47%), compared with two-thirds (63%) of those in the least deprived areas.
In contrast, young people in the most deprived areas were more likely to say they would either be looking for work or unemployed (10%), doing an apprenticeship or similar training (19%), or be in a full-time job doing 30 or more hours a week (17%), compared with those in the least deprived areas (6%, 15% and 9%, respectively).
Figure 8: Just under a half of students in the most deprived areas reported they would be in full time education in two years’ time, compared with almost two-thirds of students in the least deprived areas
Proportion of students in England reporting what they are most likely to be doing in two years’ time, September 2021 to March 2022
Embed code Embed this interactive Copy
Download this chart
.xlsx
Further analysis on future plans and aspirations can be found in COSMO’s Briefing No. 3 – Future Plans and Aspirations article.
Coronavirus (booster) FAQ: Can it cause a positive test?
When should you get it?
Enlarge this image Stephanie Carter/Getty Images/Imagezoo Stephanie Carter/Getty Images/Imagezoo
We regularly answer frequently asked questions about life during the coronavirus crisis.
If you have a question you'd like us to consider for a future post, email us at goatsandsoda@npr.org with the subject line: "Weekly Coronavirus Questions."
See an archive of our FAQs here.
A few weeks ago, my friend Ashley was preparing to take her final examinations for her Ph.D. and trying to take all the right precautions so that the exams would go smoothly.
"It was a Thursday afternoon.
I had gotten the bivalent vaccine and the flu shot," she said.
"Then the next day I started feeling bad.
"
At first, she attributed her symptoms to the effects of the COVID vaccine.
But after a few days, she describes having a moment of uncertainty about the cause of her symptoms.
"I was doing progressively worse, so on Saturday I was like, 'Oh, I have a fever and my arm is sore, let me rule out COVID just to make me feel better.'
"
She took an at-home test.
"And it was positive..."
Which at first led her to Google – and then to a phone call to the university health center – all to answer the question...
Can you test positive for COVID from getting the vaccine?
Whoever answered the phone at the health center didn't seem to know the answer – and the Google results can be a bit confusing, so we decided to ask the experts.
"It would be absolutely impossible" to test positive because you got the vaccine, says Jeremy Kamil, a virologist at Louisiana State University Health Shreveport.
This is because the tests are "testing for something not in the vaccine," says Dr. Seth Cohen, an infectious disease physician and medical director of Infection Prevention & Control at the University of Washington Medical Center.
The vaccine and the tests are based upon different parts of the COVID virus.
"All the vaccines in the United States use the spike genetic material," says Kamil.
"All of the home tests detect something called nucleocapsid," a protein not found in the vaccine.
But if the vaccine is going to make you feel ill, then how can you tell whether you're sick from the vaccine or from a COVID infection?
The answer to that question has to do with the timing and nature of your symptoms.
As for how long your vaccine symptoms might last, Cohen says "everybody's a little bit different," but you should start to be concerned if you have a fever, body aches or headaches that last more than 24 hours.
Cohen also says one symptom in particular is highly indicative of a COVID infection and not the vaccine.
"If you have any respiratory symptoms, I would definitely get tested.
The vaccine should not give you respiratory symptoms," he says.
So why did Ashley test positive so soon after getting the vaccine?
"Almost certainly what happened was she had been exposed to COVID prior to her vaccination, or maybe even the same day she was vaccinated," says Kamil.
It's especially unfortunate because "the vaccine cannot protect you right away," Kamil goes on to explain, meaning getting the booster didn't help Ashley fight off her infection.
He also said that it takes "three to four days" after getting the vaccine for your body to start creating antibodies and longer to develop full protection.
So no, the vaccine can't make you test positive.
And for those wondering, Ashley was lucky enough to develop only mild symptoms.
She successfully passed her Ph.D. defense safely over Zoom later that week.
"I didn't get to celebrate in person and had to do everything from my living room, which was a bummer, but I passed and it wasn't bad.
"
So congratulations, Ashley!
Does it matter which version of the booster shot I take?
Is one of them better than the other?
So you've made the decision to get the new bivalent booster and make an appointment at the nearest pharmacy.
But as you're filling out your personal information, there's a chance you'll be presented with a choice – Pfizer or Moderna?
Which shot should you get?
The two brands of vaccine are supposed to do the same thing – protect you against the omicron variants of COVID – but are they really the same?
Could one be better than the other?
"The Moderna shot has a tiny bit more RNA
[the active part of the vaccine] in it than the Pfizer one," says Kamil.
"However, I don't think there's any substantial difference in the protection you get.
"
Cohen echoes that point and adds that there shouldn't be a difference in the reactions you get from the vaccines.
"The side effect profiles are very similar.
The Moderna vaccine is a slightly higher dose, but we haven't necessarily seen more adverse reactions related to that.
"
And what about mixing brands?
If you've gotten Pfizer so far, can you now get Moderna or vice versa?
"It's completely fine to mix brands," Cohen says.
"Don't overthink it and don't waste an opportunity to vaccinate.
Go with whichever vaccine your local pharmacy or clinic has.
"
Kamil says what's much more important than the brand of vaccine you get is when you get it.
"If you only waited two months since your last booster [or since you were infected], you're gonna get less of a benefit than someone who waited six months," he says.
Which leads to the next question.
The CDC recommends waiting at least 90 days since a previous COVID infection before I get the new booster.
But is it bad or harmful in any way if I get the new shot sooner?
While Kamil says waiting the appropriate amount of time will give you a better immune response, Cohen says getting a shot sooner "is not harmful or bad in any way.
"
Both Cohen and Kamil say that experts are predicting a surge in cases as the weather changes and the holidays approach due to increased indoor social activity.
With that in mind, Cohen says "it doesn't make sense to necessarily skip or delay a vaccination when you might be heading into a surge.
"
As Thanksgiving approaches, Kamil says you might want to get your shot "in the middle or third week of October" if you got COVID or another booster in or before August.
I'm testing positive on one brand of self-test but not on another.
Why is this happening and what should I do?
Maybe you're just starting to feel sick – or maybe it's been over a week since you first tested positive – but either way you're worried about having COVID and infecting other people.
So you take an at-home test, but you've picked up an assortment of brands over the past few months and a curious thing happens.
You test positive on one brand but negative on another.
Cohen says that "most of the major tests that are on the market are fairly comparable" in terms of their sensitivity to detecting the virus.
But he also says that "there's more variability" in sensitivity for some of the lesser-known brands.
Those lesser-known brand tests might not pick up the remnants of virus from a waning infection.
But ultimately, Cohen says it's important to pick a brand of test "that feels intuitive.
If it's too many steps or too complicated, it's not going to be a good at-home test for you.
"
We know from conversations with experts in our previous FAQs that a positive test means it's highly likely that you do have some COVID virus circulating in your body.
So if you're testing positive for the first time, get ready to isolate and mask up according to CDC guidelines.
But if its been 10 days since you first tested positive and you're trying to figure out if you're no longer infectious, Cohen says to "take a [home] test, see if it's negative, and repeat it
[in] 48 hours to confirm."
That way you can be sure you're no longer infectious.
After reviewing data from more than 24,000 adults who received hospital care for COVID-19, researchers found that those who had inaccurate pulse oximetry readings were 10% more likely to experience delays in receiving advanced treatment.
They were also more likely to be readmitted to the hospital.
Pulse oximeters are portable devices that measure blood oxygen saturation and can help physicians monitor the health of patients.
One a person’s blood oxygen levels drop below a certain point, they are eligible for advanced COVID-19 treatment and care.
In this review, about 18% of Black, 20% of Hispanic, and 13% of white adults appeared to have higher blood oxygen saturation levels than they did.
The NHLBI-supported study published in JAMA Network Open and expands on research first published in May 2022 that identified disparities with pulse oximetry readings during the pandemic.
Researchers are studying ways to update pulse oximeters to improve their accuracy for people regardless of their skin tone, external factors, like nail polish, or underlying health conditions.
A phlebotomist prepares a COVID-19 rapid test card at a community testing site in San Francisco in January 2022.
Beginning Monday, California will no longer require masks for COVID-19 prevention in health care settings — leaving isolation for those who test positive as the last vestige of the state’s formerly mandatory COVID rules.
Stephen Lam, Staff Photographer /
The Chronicle
Beginning Monday, California will no longer require masks for COVID-19 prevention in health care settings — leaving isolation for those who test positive as the last vestige of the state’s formerly mandatory COVID rules.
California lifted its COVID-19 state of emergency in February, nearly three years after it was put in place, and President Biden indicated last week he won’t veto a Republican-led measure to immediately end the national COVID emergency, which was set to expire May 11.
But those moves, while symbolic, mostly affect funding for programs like vaccines, tests and treatments.
Strict statewide mandates and lockdown restrictions that marked the earlier portion of the pandemic are long gone.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
While local jurisdictions and private businesses can still require measures like masking, the state’s non-mandatory guidelines now largely focus on one remaining COVID-19 protocol: isolation.
But California’s guidance for when you can end isolation has loosened in the past month.
As it stands, California’s health department and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention still recommend that anyone with COVID-19 symptoms, regardless of vaccination status or if they’ve had a previous infection, should self-isolate as soon as possible and take an at-home rapid test.
People who test positive for the coronavirus are advised to isolate, including from others in their home, for at least five days and wear a well-fitting face mask for 10 days.
But in mid-March, California updated its guidance for what conditions need to be met to exit that isolation period.
Before, the state recommended that a person with COVID not exit isolation before 10 days unless they tested negative.
California health officials have now adjusted those rules to say that people can exit isolation after five days if they are feeling well, symptoms are improving and they have been fever-free for 24 hours without the use of fever-reducing medications — a change the CDC made in December 2021.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
Symptoms like loss of taste or smell, which can last months, should not keep a person from exiting isolation if all other symptoms have cleared, according to the state.
There are several caveats and exceptions within these guidelines:
• Isolation begins with the start of symptoms, or the day of the first positive test with no symptoms.
That day is considered day 0, with the first day of isolation being the day after.
•
If the results are negative but you still have symptoms, you should continue isolating and consider a PCR test, or keep testing at home every couple of days until your symptoms improve.
• If you must interact with people in your home or go out in public during the isolation period, the California Department of Public Health recommends that you as well as any caregivers wear a high-quality mask, keep windows open if possible and use portable air purifiers.
You should also clean and disinfect high-touch surfaces regularly — at least once a day — as well as any surfaces in a shared bathroom after use.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
• People need not continue masking for all 10 days if they have two negative tests taken a day apart.
Quarantine is no longer required for people who have been exposed to COVID, though both the state and the CDC recommend that people who were exposed wear a mask for 10 days — especially around those more vulnerable to serious disease — and test three to five days after exposure, even if they don’t have symptoms.
As with isolation, quarantine guidance comes with its own caveats and exceptions:
• Those who have had COVID in the past 90 days and do not have symptoms do not need to test after exposure.
• People should take extra caution after “high risk exposures” — such as contact with a partner or someone in your household where there are long periods of exposure, or unmasked activities with increased exertion or voice projection, such as indoor singing, contact sports or at indoor, crowded events.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
• People who have been exposed to the coronavirus should also use extra caution around “high risk contacts,” or people who are more susceptible to serious disease or are regularly in contact with vulnerable populations.
In those situations, the state recommends that people who have been exposed or who have come out of isolation before 10 days wear a high-quality mask.
Chong Wang, a staff member at Lincoln Elementary in Oakland, unboxes COVID-19 rapid tests to give to students and parents in August 2022.
Constanza Hevia H./Special to The Chronicle
Though public health experts maintain that isolation is important in preventing the spread of COVID-19, it may pose a challenge to students or people who cannot work remotely.
In December, state workplace regulators took away the requirement that employers pay workers to stay home for 5-10 days, meaning that workers with COVID have to rely on regular sick pay instead.
California’s guidance for K-12 students says that students who get COVID should follow isolation guidelines, but it does not specify what that means for any missed school days.
Asked under what circumstances isolation guidelines might change again in the future, the state health department said it “continues to monitor COVID-19 data and science, as well as considers federal guidance and recommendations” when issuing its own guidance, and did not provide specific criteria for any possible future changes.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
A CDC spokesperson said in an email that the agency writes recommendations based on the “best science available.”
As of now, the CDC says that people are likely most infectious within the first five days of symptoms and infection.
“If findings from current or future studies suggest a change is needed, then we would begin to consider a change,” the spokesperson wrote.
The CDC does not enforce any rules or guidelines — but local jurisdictions can choose to have stricter guidance than the state or the CDC.
Contra Costa and Alameda counties, for example, will continue requiring masks in skilled nursing facilities, even though the state requirement to do so will expire Monday.
All Bay Area counties currently align with the state’s recommendations for isolation and quarantine.
And doctors and public health experts still recommend that people stay home when sick if they can, whether or not they have COVID.
UCLA is changing its COVID-19 protocols, including the COVID-19 Call Center, testing and wastewater surveillance, the Infectious Diseases Management Team announced Wednesday.
These changes follow the end of federal, state and county COVID-19 public health emergencies, the announcement said.
Gov. Gavin Newsom ended the California state of emergency Feb. 28.
[Related: Gov. Newsom declares end to California’s COVID-19 state of emergency by Feb. 28]
The university is discontinuing the COVID-19 Call Center phone number, so university employees will need to call UCLA Occupational Health to report a positive COVID-19 test, said Tim Groeling and Michelle A. Sityar, the co-chairs of the task force, in the announcement.
Students can still report positive tests to the UCLA Ashe COVID Hotline, the announcement added.
UCLA will also move its PCR testing to a multi-campus program through the California Department of Public Health starting June 22, the announcement said.
Existing test kits will still work with the new program, but the registration process will move to a new system, the announcement added.
COVID-19 test vending machines and collection boxes other than those located at Ackerman Union, Haines Hall, Pauley Pavilion and the neuroscience building will be discontinued June 21, the announcement said.
The university will also end its wastewater surveillance testing program June 30, the announcement added.
A recently launched clinical trial at Penn Medicine will evaluate a new chewing gum designed by School of Dental Medicine researchers to trap SARS-CoV-2 in the saliva, potentially blocking transmission of COVID-19 from one person to another.
The trial will recruit participants from a pool of Penn Medicine employees whose responses to the PennOpen Pass screening system indicate that they may be battling a COVID-19 infection.
Those who enroll in the clinical trial will be given a packet of a dozen experimental tablets of gum.
Each morning, they’ll pop one in their mouth—and start to chew.
The cinnamon-flavored gum is designed to do far more than freshen breath.
Thanks to innovations emerging from the lab of School of Dental Medicine researcher Henry Daniell, the experimental gum contains plant-derived material genetically engineered to contain ACE2, a protein found naturally in human blood and saliva.
The ACE2 receptor is found on human cells and is bound by SARS-CoV-2 virus during infection.
In experimental models, chewing the gum was found to release the embedded ACE2, blocking the interaction of the chewer’s own ACE2 receptor and the viral spike protein.
In effect, the gum is designed to trap and neutralize SARS-CoV-2 in the saliva and, ideally, diminish the amount of virus left in the mouth.
It is hoped that less virus would mean a lower likelihood of passing the infection on to others.
Daniell and colleagues are also working on another gum, containing a different protein that could target a broader range of respiratory viruses, including influenza.
“I’m hoping that if this is effective and safe it will be the beginning of several other oral delivery drugs, using this platform,” says Daniell, the vice chair and W. D. Miller Professor in Penn Dental Medicine’s Department of Basic and Translational Sciences.
Findings from a pre-clinical study of the gum’s efficacy in neutralizing SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus in patient samples, published in the journal Biomaterials in July, showed it could reduce viral load to nearly undetectable levels.
The results supported an application to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for an Investigational New Drug, which went into effect in May and paved the way for the launch of the clinical trial at Penn Medicine.
The technology behind this experimental treatment has moved from the laboratory bench toward the beginning of clinical experimentation, all within Penn Dental Medicine, a first for the school.
The partnership with colleagues from Penn Medicine enables the launch of the first-in-human clinical trial.
“This technology may have the ability to reduce the spread of COVID-19 and the flu as well as make it safer for dentists and other healthcare providers to provide care to patients who we know are infected,” says Mark Wolff, the Morton Amsterdam Dean of Penn Dental Medicine, who was also a coauthor on the Biomaterials study.
A novel concept for halting disease transmission
For years, Daniell has used his plant-based platform to generate a range of biomolecules with both therapeutic and commercial potential.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, one of the proteins his lab had explored was ACE2, originally with a view toward evaluating its impact on pulmonary hypertension.
As the pandemic began, ACE2 began receiving significant attention for a different reason: its receptor provides the docking station for the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2.
Suddenly, Daniell’s work had found a new potential application: as a trap for the virus that causes COVID-19.
Daniell had already been working on protein drug delivery approach via a chewing gum, and, given that the SARS-CoV-2 virus replicates in the salivary glands, delivering ACE2 to the mouth with a gum appeared to him to be a potentially powerful approach.
Another coincidence augmented the potential of the “viral trap” approach.
During infection, not only does the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein bind to the host cell’s ACE2 receptor, but two other co-receptors on the virus, known as GM-1 receptors, facilitate the binding process.
CTB, a protein that Daniell had already been evaluating in his ACE2 biotherapeutic, turns out to also bind GM-1, thus serving as an additional lure in the context of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
In a Molecular Therapy paper published in November 2021, Daniell and colleagues showed in pre-clinical studies that a chewing gum containing CTB and ACE2 could reduce SARS-CoV-2 viral loads in saliva obtained from COVID-19 patients under experimental conditions.
The Biomaterials paper extended that work, using samples from the delta and omicron waves of the pandemic to demonstrate that the gum could neutralize these strains under these same in vitro conditions as well.
The latter publication also went beyond COVID to consider how such a gum might potentially block a broader cross-section of viruses, including those that don’t rely on the ACE2 receptor to enter cells.
“I was very keen on developing this chewing gum delivery system to trap many different oral viruses,” says Daniell, “and was looking for a way to broaden the approach.”
To do so, Daniell and colleagues developed a gum containing a different protein, called FRIL, which is found naturally in the plant Lablab purpureus, also known as the Lablab or hyacinth bean.
While the spike-ACE2 receptor interaction is specific to coronavirus, FRIL binds to molecules called complex-type N-glycans, which are found on a broader spectrum of viruses, including SARS-CoV-2 and influenza viruses.
The research team used two different assays to evaluate the in vitro performance of the FRIL and CTB-ACE2 chewing gums; one, a microbubbling test developed by the Perelman School of Medicine’s Ping Wang; the other, an electrochemical sensing test invented by Cesar de la Fuente of Penn Medicine and the School of Engineering and Applied Science.
Both tests confirmed that the gum could significantly reduce viral levels in patient samples.
Putting the gum through its paces
Throughout the stages of evaluating the gum, Daniell and Penn Dental Medicine colleagues have worked in close collaboration with researchers from around Penn, particularly in the Perelman School of Medicine, enabling the work to take on special relevancy in the context of the evolving COVID pandemic.
In addition to Wang and de la Fuente’s testing platforms playing a role in evaluating the technology, Ronald Collman, a professor of medicine, helped collect COVID-positive samples with which to test the gum.
Frederic Bushman, a microbiology professor, sequenced the viral samples to determine which strain of SARS-CoV-2 they represented.
And Penn Medicine infectious disease specialists Pablo Tebas and William Short are the leader investigators for the phase 1/2 clinical trial and the Perelman School of Medicine is serving as the regulatory sponsor for the clinical trial.
The trial aims to enroll 40 participants.
Each will receive gum tablets to chew and tubes for collecting saliva over the course of three days.
The plant material for the trial is being produced and grown at Fraunhofer, a research and development organization, before being further processed at Penn Dental Medicine, using a freeze drier machine that meets FDA regulations to process the lettuce and ready it for incorporating into gum tablets.
“Each day participants will chew four tablets of gum, and take eight samples of saliva, before and after chewing,” says Daniell.
“On the fourth day, they’ll come to the clinic, chew a final tablet of gum, and get an examination, record their symptoms, and submit their samples.”
The phase 1/2 trial will be used to ensure the gum is safe to use.
Each of the participants’ saliva samples will undergo multiple PCR tests to quantify the level of virus present.
A tool in the fight against contagion
With the gum, Daniell hopes to develop a tool that can complement others, such as vaccines and antivirals, to make a further dent in this pandemic—and perhaps future ones.
He points out that the gum represents the first Investigational New Drug submission for a human therapeutic protein drug that doesn’t require a cold chain or protein purification.
Eliminating the protein purification step—made possible because of the protein being grown in plants—reduces costs dramatically.
And being shelf-stable means the gum could more easily reach remote and less developed areas of the world without need of refrigeration or special handling.
To one day reach this scale, Daniell has partnered with Penn Center for Innovation (PCI) to spin out this technology into a Penn startup company.
Michael Poisel, who manages PCI Ventures, a division of PCI that works directly with researchers help form and launch new startups based on Penn technologies, says Daniell’s desire for broad and global accessibility has been a primary motivation behind the development of the gum and other products, from their initial promise in the lab to the clinical trial ongoing today.
“One of the exciting things about the technology is the potential to help people in countries that don’t have the resources to benefit as broadly from the current vaccines and other therapies,” Poisel says.
“Henry is really focused on making sure we can offer this in a cost-effective manner so the gum, once FDA approved, could be distributed as widely as possible and benefit as many people as possible.”
Henry Daniell is vice chair and the W. D. Miller Professor in the Department of Basic and Translational Sciences in the University of Pennsylvania School of Dental Medicine.
Mark Wolff is the Morton Amsterdam Dean in Penn’s School of Dental Medicine.
Michael Poisel is executive director of PCI Ventures at Penn.
Daniell’s coauthors on the Biomaterials paper were Penn Dental Medicine’s Smruti K. Nair, Hancheng Guan, Yuwei Guo, Rachel J. Kulchar, Geetanjali Wakade, Fracis K. Mante, Robert P. Ricciardi, and Mark Wolff; the Perelman School of Medicine’s Marcelo D. T. Torres, Andrew D. Marques, Jevon Graham-Wooten, Wan Zhou, Ping Wang, Sudheer K. Molugu, Cesar de la Fuente-Nunez, William R. Short, Pablo Tebas, Kenneth B. Margulies, Frederic Bushman, and Ronald G. Collman; Taiwan Academy of Sciences’ Md.
Shahed-Al-Mahmud, Yo-Min Liu , and Che Ma; and Brazil’s State University of Campinas–UNICAMP’s William R. de Araujo.
Daniell is a patentee in this field and the co-founder of a Penn spinout company seeking to further develop certain Penn-owned intellectual property relating to this program.
Relevant information on patents and applications is available online.
The work was supported primarily by the National Institutes of Health (HL107904, HL109442, HL133191, HL137063), the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Penn Center for Precision Medicine, Penn Health-Tech, the Center for Innovation & Precision Dentistry, and the Taiwan Ministry of Science and Technology.
Today, it is once again 9-11 here in New York City, Washington D.C., and Shanksville, Pennsylvania, where thousands of innocents died and many Americans demonstrated great bravery twenty-two very short years ago on September 11th, 2001.
For New Yorkers, it is a day we cannot and should not ever forget.
New York City’s decline was predicted in the 1970s, 1990s after 9-11, and yet again in the post-pandemic era we now live in.
Reports of our demise are always greatly exaggerated.
The city has its problems today, but its energy, work ethic, brainpower, and sheer determination always ensure its revival.
When the garment factories closed, artists, galleries, restaurants, stores, and designers literally took their places in what are now called Tribeca and Soho.
Today’s half-empty midtown offices are tomorrow’s who knows what—but definitely something.
In the aftermath of COVID, the city’s midtown population mix has changed, as have commuting and work patterns.
With our national political dialogue frozen, issues like immigration cannot be addressed.
While some parts of the nation shun new arrivals, other parts—like New York City—struggle but still welcome the foreign-born.
New Yorkers like me remember our grandparents’ stories of Ellis Island and the challenges they faced when they came to America to make a better life.
We see ourselves in these new arrivals.
New York City is again facing a period of challenge.
This is not a new story, but rather the return to an old, unwelcomed part of the city’s cycles of boom and bust.
One cannot avoid seeing the empty storefronts, homeless people sleeping in doorways, and dangerous-looking arguments in subway cars.
We New Yorkers don’t drive past our problems; we live with them.
If 100,000 immigrants need a place to start their American dream, we may not like it, but many of us feel it’s our duty as New Yorkers to lend a hand.
For sixty of the seventy years I’ve been around, I’ve lived in New York City.
I’ve also lived in Indiana, Buffalo, West Virginia, and
Washington D.C.
I loved those places and learned from their people, but I always knew that New York City was my only home.
I love New York, and I love its people.
Forty percent of New York’s residents were born in other countries (not counting those here illegally).
Two million of our residents speak Spanish in their homes and about a half million speak Chinese.
We have a million undergraduate and graduate students, beautiful parks, amazing culture and nightlife, and the awesome buzz of energy from over eight million people who feed off each other’s freedom and sense of purpose.
We’ve seen empty factories, offices, and storefronts before, and eventually, they’ll be repurposed.
The rents will go down, and new economic functions will become possible in newly available space.
Wait and see.
New York City’s neighborhoods constantly circulate and change.
I always say that New York City is a strikingly seasonal place.
As a creature of New York’s public school system and an academic through most of my career, my year starts the Tuesday after Labor Day and continues until either Memorial Day or July 4th.
Before air conditioning and even to this day, many people head to the nearby beach or the mountains for all or parts of the summer.
As a kid, when school ended on June 30, we packed a U-Haul trailer and headed up to a bungalow colony in Kerhonkson, New York.
Later, my parents owned a small place in Putnam County near Lake Secor, New York.
As an adult, my summer weekends since 1988 have been spent on the West End of Long Beach, New York.
But once Labor Day hits, we close our summer home and, along with many others, return to “the city.”
New York City’s population swells and grows with residents and tourists, and the place gets more and more intense until Thanksgiving, when we pause for turkey, family, and the parade.
We then slow down work for the holidays and new year until the big ball drops on Times Square.
People try to escape the cold if they can with the December holidays and school breaks in February; and while the pace picks up in the spring, before long, summer resumes and things ease off a bit as the cycle continues.
New York’s peak intensity is hit between Labor Day and Turkey Day.
Growing up in New York, the mass transit system was our magic gateway to the entire city.
My friends and I had the freedom, from what today might seem like a very young age, to use mass transit to discover the city.
I rode a bus the length of Flatbush Avenue to explore the stacks of the Brooklyn Public Library’s main branch at Grand Army Plaza.
We took the subway to the Village, Central Park, and Yankee Stadium.
My friends and I rode our bikes to Riis Park and Brighton Beach.
We played baseball in Marine Park, stick ball on our own street, and explored the places and people of this ever-changing city.
New Yorkers adjust to the times and resources available to them.
Before the internet, political activists set up card tables on Brooklyn’s Kings Highway to sell political campaign and cause-related buttons and bumper stickers and to distribute leaflets pushing political views and propaganda.
Today, all that organizing is done on social media.
If we’d had the internet in the 1960s and 70s, my friends and I wouldn’t have had to lug boxes of pamphlets on the subway from printers in Manhattan to our card tables in Brooklyn.
One constant is that the best musicians in the world always perform here.
As a teenager, I saw the Band play at the Brooklyn Academy of Music and the Stones play at Madison Square Garden with Ike and Tina Turner as the warm-up act.
Tourists had not yet arrived in big numbers, so you could spend an afternoon lost in museums, botanical gardens, zoos, and other sites and see exhibits in depth.
When I was 15 years old, I took a college course at the New School in civil disobedience.
I read Gandhi, Thoreau, and Martin Luther King and learned strategies of political organizing that I put to work as a high school antiwar activist.
The museums may be more crowded today, but they are larger and more professionally managed than ever.
And high school kids are still taking courses at New York City’s many universities.
The point here is that the city that never sleeps also never stops.
It’s a high-energy, dynamic, change machine.
This was true half a century ago, and it is true today.
People come here because they know that this is the largest job market in the world’s largest economy.
New York City’s iconic images are seen in movies and on social media, and the city is always globally visible.
Many people struggle in New York, but when you have this many people crowded together, humans tend to help each other when they see need.
I think, at a personal level, this is true of most Americans and of people all over the world.
We saw that here during COVID, after 9-11, and after Hurricane Sandy.
On this September 11th, I think back to the brilliant blue sky on that late summer morning in 2001 and the unthinkable horror of that day.
The silence on Broadway.
The smoke cloud drifting north, and the jet fighters circling the city.
But I also remember the brave first responders heading to the Trade Center, their ultimate sacrifices, and people helping people as they ran to safety through the gray and white dust of destruction.
And I think of a city in stunned, shocked silence, managing to find community and finally rebuild and recover.
Over two decades later, we should remember what we came back from and be fully confident that if we could create a post-9-11 New York City, we can certainly create a post-COVID city as well.
Views and opinions expressed here are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the official position of the Columbia Climate School, Earth Institute or Columbia University.
M.I.A. has clarified her stance on COVID vaccines, saying she’s “not really” an anti-vaxxer after she was criticised earlier this week.
Yesterday (October 13), the singer faced a backlash for a tweet which compared alt-right figure Alex Jones’ falsehoods about the Sandy Hook shooting to celebrities “pushing” vaccines.
Jones was this week ordered to pay nearly $1billion in damages after falsely claiming for years that the 2012 shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School never happened.
“If Alex Jones pays for lying shouldn’t every celebrity pushing vaccines pay too?”
M.I.A. wrote, before comparing Jones’ misinformation to “Pfizer lying” in a follow-up tweet.
Advertisement
In a new interview with The Guardian about her new album ‘MATA’, out today (October 14), M.I.A. was asked about her vaccine stance, to which she responded: “The language they use to attack anybody is to say: ‘Oh, she’s an anti-vaxxer’ or blah blah blah.
And it’s like, no, not really.
“I know three people who have died from taking the vaccine and I know three people who have died from COVID.
This is in my life, in my experience.
If anyone is going to deny that experience and gaslight me, saying: ‘No, that’s not your experience,’ then what is the point of anything?”
She added: “What is the existence that you are trying to protect by giving me a vaccine if I can’t even have an experience and process that information in my own brain and come to some sort of conclusion?
And live within a society where I have to make choices every day?
Recommended
“There’s this weird idea that we’re all free, and that we fight for everything, and we can say what we want, but on the other hand, I feel like there’s even more of a crackdown on that.”
Elsewhere in the interview M.I.A. discussed her Sandy Hook comments.
While she believes it is “terrible” that the families were subjected to Alex Jones’ lies, she wishes the same courtesy could be given to the Tamil population in her native Sri Lanka, whose genocide M.I.A. has long spoken about.
“Today, you’ve got some white guy who apparently lied and made some families feel terrible, who now has to pay $1bn because he denied someone’s real experience, real loss and real emotional trauma,” she said of Jones.
Advertisement
“If we’re going to have a scapegoat in society where somebody’s going to pay for [lying], then I would like to bring the same sort of court case against every western publication that said only 40,000 Tamils were killed in the last days of the war.”
In 2020, the singer responded to backlash after saying that she would “choose death” over being vaccinated.
She later clarified that while she’s “not against vaccines”, she doesn’t want them produced by “companies who care more for profit [than] humans.”
Vaccination during pregnancy may protect children in their first months of life — before they are eligible to receive a COVID-19 vaccine.
Vaccination during pregnancy may protect children in their first months of life — before they are eligible to receive a COVID-19 vaccine.
What you need to know
Infants less than 6 months of age are too young to receive a COVID-19 vaccine, but they are more likely to require hospitalization and intensive care from SARS-CoV-2 infection than children age 1 to 4 years old.
Development of methods to protect these infants from severe COVID-19 is needed.
In a small study supported by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, researchers have found that pregnant and lactating women who were vaccinated and received a booster COVID-19 dose generated antibodies against SARS-CoV-2.
The researchers wanted to see whether these antibodies could be transferred to the women’s children.
What did the researchers do?
Between October 2021 and April 2022, researchers collected paired breastmilk and blood samples from 45 lactating women before and after the women had received a booster dose of a COVID-19 vaccine.
The researchers also collected blood samples from the women’s children.
The milk and blood samples were collected less than 30 days before a booster and again 14 to 35 days after a booster.
The researchers found that the women had higher levels of protective antibodies in their breast milk after being boosted compared with their pre-booster levels, but their children did not have higher levels of blood antibodies.
However, the researchers did find protective antibodies in nearly 75% of infants born to women who had been vaccinated during pregnancy.
On average, these antibodies from pregnant women were still present when the infants were 5 months old.
Why is this research important?
This study provides more evidence that vaccination among pregnant and lactating women may protect their infants from COVID-19 during the first months of life, when babies are particularly vulnerable.
COVID-19 vaccines are safe and effective for pregnant and lactating people, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that all people age 6 months and older stay up to date on their COVID-19 vaccinations.
Where can I go to learn more?
COVID-19 Vaccination During Pregnancy Likely Benefits Moms and Babies
An earlier study reported on the safety of vaccines and the antibody response among pregnant and lactating women.
COVID-19 Vaccines While Pregnant or Breastfeeding
CDC shares information related to COVID-19 vaccination for pregnant and lactating people.
Booster Vaccine Targeting Omicron Offers Broader COVID-19 Protection
Targeted COVID-19 booster vaccines create a better immune response than vaccines targeting the original strain of SARS-CoV-2.
Sources
Rick, A. M., Lentscher, A., Xu, L., Wilkins, M. S., Nasser, A., Tuttle, D. J., Megli, C., Marques, E. T. A., McElroy, A. K., Williams, J. V., & Martin, J. M. (2023).
Impact of maternal SARS-CoV-2 booster vaccination on blood and breastmilk antibodies.
PLOS One, 18(6), e0287103.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0287103
Vietnam Briefing has developed into a premium source for insight on doing business in Vietnam.
It publishes business news concerning foreign direct investment into Vietnam, including the most important tax, legal and accounting issues.
The Vietnam Briefing Magazine was first published in 2009, and is contributed to by investment professionals based in Vietnam.
How to protect yourself against COVID, flu and RSV
Once a hallmark sign of many COVID-19 cases — sometimes more reliable than even flu-like symptoms at sniffing out people infected by the virus early in the pandemic — was the sudden loss of smell and taste.
But growing research suggests this symptom has become far less common, with only a small fraction of new patients reporting it last year.
The findings come from analysis of a sweeping dataset of medical records gathered by the National Institutes of Health for COVID-19 researchers from around the country.
"In the past, people were quite aware, if they had a cold and they lost their sense of smell, that they potentially had COVID.
Whereas now, you really can't tell," Dr. Evan Reiter, medical director of VCU Health's Smell and Taste Disorders Center, told CBS News.
Reiter led the study, which was published in May in the journal Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, examining odds of patients with COVID-19 also reporting loss of smell and taste.
While the symptoms known as chemosensory loss occurred in an estimated 50% of cases early in the pandemic, the latest research suggests a prevalence of just 3% to 4% in more recent Omicron waves.
The study is among the latest to illustrate how the symptoms inflicted by the virus have changed, as new variants have emerged and immunity from infections and prior vaccinations offer defenses that early patients lacked.
Researchers from University College London reported in a study out last week that the proportion of cases reporting loss of taste or smell had significantly decreased after the Omicron strain emerged in 2021.
As more variants of concern emerged, "SARS-CoV-2 symptomatology gradually resembled that of other respiratory symptoms.
The more contagious Omicron strains were significantly associated with an increase in cough and sneezing," that study's authors wrote in the journal Scientific Reports.
A path to new treatments?
Scientists have more clues now to unravel why many patients may have not recovered their taste or smell after infections earlier in the pandemic.
A team of researchers, led by Duke University's Dr. Bradley Goldstein and Harvard University's Dr. Sandeep Datta, reported last year that a ramped-up immune response seemed to be still targeting nerve cells in the nose long after the virus had already dissipated.
Volunteers allowed the doctors to scoop out a small sample of tissue from high up in their nose, which was then rushed back to their lab to be cleaned and filtered.
Those were fed into instruments that let them analyze the samples down to a single cell.
These were compared against data from samples of other patients without this kind of smell loss, revealing signs of ongoing inflammation driven by the immune system's T cells.
That amounted to the first living confirmation of a leading theory for long COVID smell loss, which had been based mostly from autopsies or experiments on animals.
"Accompanied by just overall fewer intact olfactory neurons or nerve cells in those long COVID smell loss biopsies, that combination suggests likely those immune cells are continuing to drive some level of ongoing damage or preventing repair," Goldstein, associate professor at Duke's Department of Head and Neck Surgery and Communication Sciences, told CBS News.
Goldstein said their findings echoed those seen driving some other persistent symptoms in long COVID sufferers, recalling meetings with other researchers convened by the NIH's RECOVER program.
"Whether it's the kidney, or the heart, or the brain, I think there's a common theme emerging that a lot of it seems like it's immune system mediated, and that was one of the big findings in our paper," said Goldstein.
This could pave the way to new treatments that might be able to make room for the body to rebuild its nerve cells for smell by directly curbing the immune response.
"I think this is where the olfactory loss field needs to go, more broadly, in the direction of what areas could be drug targets and may promote nerve cell regeneration or recovery," he said.
The NIH recently announced it had begun enrolling volunteers in trials of treatments for some long COVID symptoms, though none have specifically been announced for smell loss.
"Patients experience many symptoms," the agency said in a statement, adding, "the interventions currently tested or in process of being tested may sort effects on many of these symptoms, including loss of smell/taste.
"
Smell training and nose injections
For now, doctors only have a handful of options to try and treat patients still struggling with the loss of their sense of smell.
Beyond impacting one's quality of life, like distorting once-palatable foods into off-putting flavors, Reiter said patients struggling with this long COVID issue face a range of new challenges.
"Your nose serves as a little bit of an early warning system with smoke and fire, and you have a harder time detecting things like gas leaks, and even things like detecting whether or not your food is spoiled," said Reiter.
A common starting point for treatment is olfactory training, which works by repeatedly exposing the nose's damaged smell nerves to distinct categories of pleasant smells.
One drug treatment that has been tried is steroids, though Reiter said evidence of it working remains scarce.
Reiter said an approach that has shown some promise in pilot studies is using concentrated formulations of platelets drawn from the patient's own blood, which might be able to regrow tissue after being injected or soaked into the nose.
However, treatments can carry risks, and Reiter said many patients eventually recover their sense of smell on their own after little intervention by doctors.
An earlier survey by Reiter's group found only 7.5% of patients continued to have no improvement in their sense of smell years later.
"A lot of the time, it really just is time.
Nerves can recover," said Reiter.
COVID-19 vaccination – Keeping up to date with your COVID-19 vaccines after testing positive (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people)
This poster, designed for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, explains how you should keep up to date with your COVID-19 vaccinations after testing positive for COVID-19.
You have /5 articles left.
Sign up for a free account or log in.
One-third of students surveyed for a new report about COVID-19 emergency aid said they put the funds toward tuition, technology, internet service or utilities.
Federal emergency aid disbursed during the COVID-19 pandemic helped college students stay enrolled in classes, provided stress relief and improved academic outcomes, a new report out today says.
The National Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators partnered with NASPA:
Student Affairs Administrators in Higher Education and the consulting firm HCM Strategists to survey students and institutions about the higher education COVID-19 emergency stimulus funds and hear about lessons learned to inform future emergency aid programs at the institutional, state and federal levels.
Results of the surveys were released in a new report, “Evaluating Student and Institutional Experiences With HEERF.”
“These funds had a positive impact on students,” said Jill Desjean, a senior policy analyst for NASFAA.
“We found that they found the grant amounts to be meaningful enough to make a difference.
They found the funds got to them in a timely fashion, and we even saw students reporting that they enjoy improved outcomes as a result of having received the HEERF friends.”
Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, the federal government has sent more than $76 billion to colleges and universities through the Higher Education Emergency Relief Fund.
About half of that was required to go to students in the form of emergency aid grants, though half of the institutions surveyed went beyond that requirement.
NASFAA and its partners surveyed 18,000 students about the emergency aid as well as 321 institutions.
More than half of the students said they received emergency financial assistance, ranging from $1,000 to $2,000.
The majority used the money to pay for food, books and housing, while a third put the funds toward tuition, technology, internet service or utilities.
Forty-one percent of the students said they borrowed less money in student loans because of the aid and that the money allowed them to cut back on the number of hours they worked.
Those who didn’t receive any assistance said they were unaware that the aid was available and didn’t know the process for applying for assistance.
Those who did apply and were denied said in the survey that they didn’t know why their request was rejected.
The responses among different demographic groups were not significantly different, according to the report.
Congress initially stipulated that money for students could only be used for COVID-19-related expenses, which Desjean said was “unnecessarily limiting.”
In subsequent relief bills, lawmakers gave more flexibility to colleges and universities in disbursing the aid.
Those changes helped, Desjean said.
Ninety-three percent of institutions surveyed said the increased flexibility was broad enough to accommodate students’ needs most or all of the time.
That’s an improvement from NASFAA’s 2020 survey, when 73 percent of institutions said the aid was able to meet students’ needs most or all of the time.
The U.S. Department of Education’s management of the stimulus funds improved with each round of funding, institutions said in the survey.
Ninety percent of the institutions surveyed said the department’s guidance in the second and third rounds was somewhat or very organized, while only 11 percent found the guidance in the first round organized.
Desjean said NASFAA wanted to compare the three rounds of funding after releasing a report in 2020 on implementation issues with the first round.
“What we’ve learned more than anything is that you need to be really careful about how you design a program like this to ensure that it works well,” Desjean said.
The report includes considerations for institutional decision makers as well as state and federal lawmakers to weigh when setting up emergency aid programs.
Those include prioritizing awareness of student needs and improving communication to students about the availability of funds.
NASFAA suggested that a federal emergency aid program should have broad allowable uses of aid and ensure that institutions serving students with the greatest needs have adequate resources to meet those needs.
“HEERF definitely just threw open the door to institutions to realize how many emergencies come up for students and how important it is for them to be able to have access to quick funds to stay enrolled in school,” Desjean said.
“I think some of the positive outcomes that they saw from students who received HEERF grants versus those who didn’t will show them that emergency funding promotes positive student outcomes and helps students complete college.”
Many colleges and universities have some form of emergency funding programs, but those funds tend to “serve a fraction of the student body with one-time, small award amounts,” according to the report.
Some institutions said they improved existing aid programs using lessons learned from disbursing the HEERF emergency grants.
“This included streamlining application processes, expediting approval timelines, strengthening communications to students, and developing resources to address basic needs,” the report says.
A federal emergency aid program could fill financial gaps at colleges and universities with fewer resources and improve outcomes for students, the report suggests.
“The HEERF student emergency grant program served effectively as a large-scale experiment for a federal emergency aid program,” the report says.
“Lessons learned from administering all three rounds of funding—what worked, what didn’t work, and what improvements were made along the way—provide valuable insight into how a federal emergency aid program should be designed.”
Settings
All FDA-authorized or -cleared tests have instructions for use that must be explicitly followed.
Although breath is not a specimen type that is covered by CLIA considerations, these other diagnostic tests are specifically required to be performed in authorized settings noted as “Near Patient/Point-of-Care” where the patient specimen is both collected and analyzed, such as within doctors’ offices, hospitals, and mobile testing sites.
The test must be performed by a qualified, trained operator under the supervision of a healthcare provider licensed or authorized by state law to prescribe tests.
Facilities using this test must have a process in place to ensure that the product is used only in these authorized settings, as defined within the EUA.
Research on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, census data issues, and reproductive health were among the many topics discussed at the Population Association of America meeting in New Orleans in mid-April.
The annual conference offered researchers and practitioners a platform to discuss new work in 265 sessions and more than 800 poster presentations.
Below, we highlight some sessions attended by PRB staff.
Most of the research studies described are ongoing and not yet published; the full conference program can be accessed here.
COVID-19 infection during pregnancy linked to an increased risk of premature birth
In 2020, a COVID-19 infection in pregnancy was associated with a higher risk of preterm or very preterm childbirth, or birth occurring between 28 and 37 weeks of gestation, found an analysis of California data by Florencia Torche of Stanford University and Jenna Nobles of the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
The impact of a COVID-19 infection on premature births declined in 2021 and disappeared in 2022, they found.
Torche and Nobles suggest that the waning impact of infection may reflect new variants of the virus and access to vaccines and antiviral therapies, underscoring the importance of vaccination to reducing the burden of infection on vulnerable groups.
COVID-19 disruptions in family planning services were minimal in 15 Asian and sub-Saharan African countries
The COVID-19 pandemic threatened to derail gains in family planning programs in many low- and lower-middle incomes countries.
A global team led by Avenir Health examined the impact in 15 countries in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa using service statistics to calculate the annual estimated number of modern contraceptive users in 2019 and 2020.
They found that only three countries (Madagascar, Pakistan, and Zimbabwe) saw declines in the total number of estimated modern users, mainly driven by declines in the use of short-term methods.
Contraceptive implant programs grew in 12 countries and the number of estimated injectable users increased in nine countries.
While COVID-19 caused temporary disruptions to family planning services in most of the countries, most were able to continue to provide commodities, leading to a lower negative impact than initially feared, they found.
U.S. Census data users express concerns about new data privacy measures
For 2020 Census data, the U.S. Census Bureau is applying a relatively new disclosure avoidance framework called differential privacy that protects respondent confidentiality by inserting random noise into the data.
In a lively session, census data experts representing state government agencies and academia expressed concerns about the effects of the new privacy-protection procedures on 2020 Census data products, including:
Delays in the release of 2020 Census data.
Inaccurate data for small geographic areas—especially census blocks.
Improbable and impossible results (such as census blocks where all the residents are under age 18).
Difficulty in explaining new disclosure avoidance procedures to data users.
Sallie Ann Keller, Chief Scientist at the Census Bureau, described their challenges in balancing data privacy, accuracy, and availability; she also said the Census Bureau is committed to involving stakeholders in the planning process.
PRB is also working in partnership with the Census Bureau to produce a series of user-friendly briefs that describe how disclosure avoidance procedures are being applied to 2020 Census data products and the implications of for data users.
For more information, see Disclosure Avoidance in the 2020 Census: What Should Data Users Know About Respondent Privacy and Data Accuracy?.
Increase in U.S. childbearing after age 35 does not explain rise in severe pregnancy complications
Many observers point to the shift to more childbearing at older ages in the United States to explain the rise in severe pregnancy complications (known as severe maternal morbidity).
But Alison Gemmill and colleagues at Johns Hopkins University find that the upward trend is driven by increases in severe complications at all ages.
The role of increased maternal age was minimal for all subgroups except Black women, where births at older ages represented 17% of the rise in severe complications, they reported.
In low- and middle-income countries, more than half of women who discontinue contraception for method-related reasons resume within three months
Among women in low- and middle-income countries who stopped using contraception for method-related reasons, the monthly probability of resuming contraception was higher than the probability of pregnancy in the year after discontinuation, a team of researchers found.
Alison Gemmill and Dana Sarnak of Johns Hopkins University, Sarah Bradley of Abt Associates, and Eve Brecker and Kaitlyn Patierno of PRB used pooled data from Demographic and Health Surveys in 49 countries after 2009.
On average, close to half of women who discontinued for method-related reasons resumed contraception within three months, they found, but there was wide variation across settings.
Country-specific analyses showed that the probability of resuming contraception within three months ranged from 15% in Liberia, Mali, and Sierra Leone to 85% in Bangladesh.
Many women do not resume contraception and continue to be at potential risk of unintended pregnancy post discontinuation, they point out.
Policymakers and program planners should continue focusing on interventions that meet the contraceptive needs of women who want to avoid pregnancy, including initiatives that strengthen contraceptive counseling as well as those that ensure different contraceptive options are available.
Lack of data on migration after U.S. tropical storms makes effects of climate change hard to measure
Migration is an important driver of county-level growth in the United States, and tax dollars going to storm relief—including relocating victims—have risen steadily during the past several decades.
Despite this, little research has been done to collect data around how tropical storms affect excess migration, or migration that wouldn’t have happened without climate-related factors.
And the relative risk of experiencing a flood migrants faced before and after migration has not been included in prior studies, reports Eugenio Paglino at the University of Pennsylvania, who worked to measure both these phenomena.
While the number of people at risk from tropical storms has risen, Paglino’s study showed small rates of excess migration after storms.
He also found that migrants’ risk levels did not decrease, since they tended to migrate to other high-risk areas.
One significant limitation of the study was lack of recent data: Paglino measured migration between 1990-2010 due to a lack of available data from his primary source, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
Diverse perspectives matter in public data accuracy
In a health survey question about physical activity, the examples of exercise listed were golf and bowling.
Are those examples broadly representative, or just representative of the people who were in the room when the questionnaire was written?
Might people who play soccer or basketball, or those who ride a bicycle to work, be missed?
At a session hosted by the Census Quality Reinforcement Taskforce, Census Bureau Director Robert Santos and U.S. Deputy Chief Data Scientist Dominique Duval-Diop spoke about the importance of having a diversity of voices behind the scenes in the collection, production, and publication of official statistics.
Both gave concrete examples of why representation matters—from survey question phrasing to choosing which data are used in disaster recovery fund distribution.
Both explained how they are working to bring more voices to the table and why diversity matters for good decision-making.
Wage penalty for mothers with children larger when adult children are considered
How should we define motherhood?
If you’re a researcher studying the wage penalty for women with children, the definition you use will likely affect your results, according to Alexandra Killewald at Harvard University.
The motherhood wage penalty describes how women with children earn less than childless women with similar characteristics.
And, according to Killewald and colleagues, the wage penalty is larger if you use a more inclusive definition of motherhood that includes not only mothers living with their children, but also moms with older children who have left the home.
2020 census block-level estimates in California find overcount of Asian Americans
The California Complete Count Committee, an advisory panel established by California’s Census 2020 Office, commissioned the RAND Corporation to conduct an independent survey of 173 census blocks to evaluate the data accuracy of the latest decennial Census.
The survey found that while the total population of blocks was comparable to official census numbers, subpopulation totals were highly variable.
Researchers found evidence suggesting Asian people and people with broadband internet access were more likely to be over counted.
Many Americans prioritized healthy behaviors at onset of COVID-19 pandemic
At the beginning of the pandemic in 2020, Americans on average got more sleep and got a bit more exercise than in 2019, Sarah Flood, Janet Wang, and Phyllis Moen of the University of Minnesota show based on American Time Use Survey data.
U.S. adults also watched more television, a sedentary and passive activity, they found.
Women—but not men—spent much more time preparing food, and men without jobs or college degrees were less physically active than in 2019, which may reflect the mental health impact of unemployment.
The City of Detroit is relocating its COVID-19 vaccination and testing site to the Detroit Health Department.
Beginning Monday, COVID-related services will be offered by appointment and for walk-ins at the main health office at 100 Mack Avenue.
The city has been administering COVID vaccines and testing at the Northwest Activities Center.
That operation will close on Friday.
“Although COVID-19 is being considered as an endemic, vaccinations and testing are still vital for Detroiters, and the Detroit Health Department will continue to offer services to help reduce the spread of the disease, and keep Detroiters healthy,” city officials noted in a news release.
The Detroit Health Department will offer COVID vaccines from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Monday through Friday.
COVID testing will be available from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m. Monday through Friday.
Additionally, the Samaritan Center, 5555 Conner St., will continue to provide COVID-19 vaccinations only from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Monday through Friday.
To schedule an appointment, visit the health department website’s self-scheduling page or text “TEST” to (313) 329-7272.
On March 25, 2020, Hannah Davis was texting with two friends when she realized that she couldn’t understand one of their messages.
In hindsight, that was the first sign that she had COVID-19.
It was also her first experience with the phenomenon known as “brain fog,” and the moment when her old life contracted into her current one.
She once worked in artificial intelligence and analyzed complex systems without hesitation, but now “runs into a mental wall” when faced with tasks as simple as filling out forms.
Her memory, once vivid, feels frayed and fleeting.
Former mundanities—buying food, making meals, cleaning up—can be agonizingly difficult.
Her inner world—what she calls “the extras of thinking, like daydreaming, making plans, imagining”—is gone.
The fog “is so encompassing,” she told me, “it affects every area of my life.”
For more than 900 days, while other long-COVID symptoms have waxed and waned, her brain fog has never really lifted.
Of long COVID’s many possible symptoms, brain fog “is by far one of the most disabling and destructive,” Emma Ladds, a primary-care specialist from the University of Oxford, told me.
It’s also among the most misunderstood.
It wasn’t even included in the list of possible COVID symptoms when the coronavirus pandemic first began.
But 20 to 30 percent of patients report brain fog three months after their initial infection, as do 65 to 85 percent of the long-haulers who stay sick for much longer.
It can afflict people who were never ill enough to need a ventilator—or any hospital care.
And it can affect young people in the prime of their mental lives.
Long-haulers with brain fog say that it’s like none of the things that people—including many medical professionals—jeeringly compare it to.
It is more profound than the clouded thinking that accompanies hangovers, stress, or fatigue.
For Davis, it has been distinct from and worse than her experience with ADHD.
It is not psychosomatic, and involves real changes to the structure and chemistry of the brain.
It is not a mood disorder: “If anyone is saying that this is due to depression and anxiety, they have no basis for that, and data suggest it might be the other direction,” Joanna Hellmuth, a neurologist at UC San Francisco, told me.
And despite its nebulous name, brain fog is not an umbrella term for every possible mental problem.
At its core, Hellmuth said, it is almost always a disorder of “executive function”—the set of mental abilities that includes focusing attention, holding information in mind, and blocking out distractions.
These skills are so foundational that when they crumble, much of a person’s cognitive edifice collapses.
Anything involving concentration, multitasking, and planning—that is, almost everything important—becomes absurdly arduous.
“It raises what are unconscious processes for healthy people to the level of conscious decision making,” Fiona Robertson, a writer based in Aberdeen, Scotland, told me.
For example, Robertson’s brain often loses focus mid-sentence, leading to what she jokingly calls “so-yeah syndrome”: “I forget what I’m saying, tail off, and go, ‘So, yeah …’” she said.
Brain fog stopped Kristen Tjaden from driving, because she’d forget her destination en route.
For more than a year, she couldn’t read, either, because making sense of a series of words had become too difficult.
Angela Meriquez Vázquez told me it once took her two hours to schedule a meeting over email: She’d check her calendar, but the information would slip in the second it took to bring up her inbox.
At her worst, she couldn’t unload a dishwasher, because identifying an object, remembering where it should go, and putting it there was too complicated.
Memory suffers, too, but in a different way from degenerative conditions like Alzheimer’s.
The memories are there, but with executive function malfunctioning, the brain neither chooses the important things to store nor retrieves that information efficiently.
Davis, who is part of the Patient-Led Research Collaborative, can remember facts from scientific papers, but not events.
When she thinks of her loved ones, or her old life, they feel distant.
“Moments that affected me don’t feel like they’re part of me anymore,” she said.
“It feels like I am a void and I’m living in a void.”
Most people with brain fog are not so severely affected, and gradually improve with time.
But even when people recover enough to work, they can struggle with minds that are less nimble than before.
“We’re used to driving a sports car, and now we are left with a jalopy,” Vázquez said.
In some professions, a jalopy won’t cut it.
“I’ve had surgeons who can’t go back to surgery, because they need their executive function,” Monica Verduzco-Gutierrez, a rehabilitation specialist at UT Health San Antonio, told me.
Robertson, meanwhile, was studying theoretical physics in college when she first got sick, and her fog occluded a career path that was once brightly lit.
“I used to sparkle, like I could pull these things together and start to see how the universe works,” she told me.
“I’ve never been able to access that sensation again, and I miss it, every day, like an ache.”
That loss of identity was as disruptive as the physical aspects of the disease, which “I always thought I could deal with … if I could just think properly,” Robertson said.
“This is the thing that’s destabilized me most.”
Robertson predicted that the pandemic would trigger a wave of cognitive impairment in March 2020.
Her brain fog began two decades earlier, likely with a different viral illness, but she developed the same executive-function impairments that long-haulers experience, which then worsened when she got COVID last year.
That specific constellation of problems also befalls many people living with HIV, epileptics after seizures, cancer patients experiencing so-called chemo brain, and people with several complex chronic illnesses such as fibromyalgia.
It’s part of the diagnostic criteria for myalgic encephalomyelitis, also known as chronic fatigue syndrome, or ME/CFS—a condition that Davis and many other long-haulers now have.
Brain fog existed well before COVID, affecting many people whose conditions were stigmatized, dismissed, or neglected.
“For all of those years, people just treated it like it’s not worth researching,” Robertson told me.
“So many of us were told, Oh, it’s just a bit of a depression.”
Several clinicians I spoke with argued that the term brain fog makes the condition sound like a temporary inconvenience and deprives patients of the legitimacy that more medicalized language like cognitive impairment would bestow.
But Aparna Nair, a historian of disability at the University of Oklahoma, noted that disability communities have used the term for decades, and there are many other reasons behind brain fog’s dismissal beyond terminology.
(A surfeit of syllables didn’t stop fibromyalgia and myalgic encephalomyelitis from being trivialized.)
For example, Hellmuth noted that in her field of cognitive neurology, “virtually all the infrastructure and teaching” centers on degenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s, in which rogue proteins afflict elderly brains.
Few researchers know that viruses can cause cognitive disorders in younger people, so few study their effects.
“As a result, no one learns about it in medical school,” Hellmuth said.
And because “there’s not a lot of humility in medicine, people end up blaming patients instead of looking for answers,” she said.
People with brain fog also excel at hiding it: None of the long-haulers I’ve interviewed sounded cognitively impaired.
But at times when her speech is obviously sluggish, “nobody except my husband and mother see me,” Robertson said.
The stigma that long-haulers experience also motivates them to present as normal in social situations or doctor appointments, which compounds the mistaken sense that they’re less impaired than they claim—and can be debilitatingly draining.
“They’ll do what is asked of them when you’re testing them, and your results will say they were normal,” David Putrino, who leads a long-COVID rehabilitation clinic at Mount Sinai, told me.
“It’s only if you check in on them two days later that you’ll see you’ve wrecked them for a week.”
“We also don’t have the right tools for measuring brain fog,” Putrino said.
Doctors often use the Montreal Cognitive Assessment, which was designed to uncover extreme mental problems in elderly people with dementia, and “isn’t validated for anyone under age 55,” Hellmuth told me.
Even a person with severe brain fog can ace it.
More sophisticated tests exist, but they still compare people with the population average rather than their previous baseline.
“A high-functioning person with a decline in their abilities who falls within the normal range is told they don’t have a problem,” Hellmuth said.
This pattern exists for many long-COVID symptoms: Doctors order inappropriate or overly simplistic tests, whose negative results are used to discredit patients’ genuine symptoms.
It doesn’t help that brain fog (and long COVID more generally) disproportionately affects women, who have a long history of being labeled as emotional or hysterical by the medical establishment.
But every patient with brain fog “tells me the exact same story of executive-function symptoms,” Hellmuth said.
“If people were making this up, the clinical narrative wouldn’t be the same.”
Earlier this year, a team of British researchers rendered the invisible nature of brain fog in the stark black-and-white imagery of MRI scans.
Gwenaëlle Douaud at the University of Oxford and her colleagues analyzed data from the UK Biobank study, which had regularly scanned the brains of hundreds of volunteers for years prior to the pandemic.
When some of those volunteers caught COVID, the team could compare their after scans to the before ones.
They found that even mild infections can slightly shrink the brain and reduce the thickness of its neuron-rich gray matter.
At their worst, these changes were comparable to a decade of aging.
They were especially pronounced in areas such as the parahippocampal gyrus, which is important for encoding and retrieving memories, and the orbitofrontal cortex, which is important for executive function.
They were still apparent in people who hadn’t been hospitalized.
And they were accompanied by cognitive problems.
Although SARS-CoV-2, the coronavirus that causes COVID, can enter and infect the central nervous system, it doesn’t do so efficiently, persistently, or frequently, Michelle Monje, a neuro-oncologist at Stanford, told me.
Instead, she thinks that in most cases the virus harms the brain without directly infecting it.
She and her colleagues recently showed that when mice experience mild bouts of COVID, inflammatory chemicals can travel from the lungs to the brain, where they disrupt cells called microglia.
Normally, microglia act as groundskeepers, supporting neurons by pruning unnecessary connections and cleaning unwanted debris.
When inflamed, their efforts become overenthusiastic and destructive.
In their presence, the hippocampus—a region crucial for memory—produces fewer fresh neurons, while many existing neurons lose their insulating coats, so electric signals now course along these cells more slowly.
These are the same changes that Monje sees in cancer patients with “chemo fog.”
And although she and her team did their COVID experiments in mice, they found high levels of the same inflammatory chemicals in long-haulers with brain fog.
Monje suspects that neuro-inflammation is “probably the most common way” that COVID results in brain fog, but that there are likely many such routes.
COVID could possibly trigger autoimmune problems in which the immune system mistakenly attacks the nervous system, or reactivate dormant viruses such as Epstein-Barr virus, which has been linked to conditions including ME/CFS and multiple sclerosis.
By damaging blood vessels and filling them with small clots, COVID also throttles the brain’s blood supply, depriving this most energetically demanding of organs of oxygen and fuel.
This oxygen shortfall isn’t stark enough to kill neurons or send people to an ICU, but “the brain isn’t getting what it needs to fire on all cylinders,” Putrino told me.
(The severe oxygen deprivation that forces some people with COVID into critical care causes different cognitive problems than what most long-haulers experience.)
None of these explanations is set in stone, but they can collectively make sense of brain fog’s features.
A lack of oxygen would affect sophisticated and energy-dependent cognitive tasks first, which explains why executive function and language “are the first ones to go,” Putrino said.
Without insulating coats, neurons work more slowly, which explains why many long-haulers feel that their processing speed is shot: “You’re losing the thing that facilitates fast neural connection between brain regions,” Monje said.
These problems can be exacerbated or mitigated by factors such as sleep and rest, which explains why many people with brain fog have good days and bad days.
And although other respiratory viruses can wreak inflammatory havoc on the brain, SARS-CoV-2 does so more potently than, say, influenza, which explains both why people such as Robertson developed brain fog long before the current pandemic and why the symptom is especially prominent among COVID long-haulers.
Perhaps the most important implication of this emerging science is that brain fog is “potentially reversible,” Monje said.
If the symptom was the work of a persistent brain infection, or the mass death of neurons following severe oxygen starvation, it would be hard to undo.
But neuroinflammation isn’t destiny.
Cancer researchers, for example, have developed drugs that can calm berserk microglia in mice and restore their cognitive abilities; some are being tested in early clinical trials.
“I’m hopeful that we’ll find the same to be true in COVID,” she said.
Biomedical advances might take years to arrive, but long-haulers need help with brain fog now.
Absent cures, most approaches to treatment are about helping people manage their symptoms.
Sounder sleep, healthy eating, and other generic lifestyle changes can make the condition more tolerable.
Breathing and relaxation techniques can help people through bad flare-ups; speech therapy can help those with problems finding words.
Some over-the-counter medications such as antihistamines can ease inflammatory symptoms, while stimulants can boost lagging concentration.
“Some people spontaneously recover back to baseline,” Hellmuth told me, “but two and a half years on, a lot of patients I see are no better.”
And between these extremes lies perhaps the largest group of long-haulers—those whose brain fog has improved but not vanished, and who can “maintain a relatively normal life, but only after making serious accommodations,” Putrino said.
Long recovery periods and a slew of lifehacks make regular living possible, but more slowly and at higher cost.
Kristen Tjaden can read again, albeit for short bursts followed by long rests, but hasn’t returned to work.
Angela Meriquez Vázquez can work but can’t multitask or process meetings in real time.
Julia Moore Vogel, who helps lead a large biomedical research program, can muster enough executive function for her job, but “almost everything else in my life I’ve cut out to make room for that,” she told me.
“I only leave the house or socialize once a week.”
And she rarely talks about these problems openly because “in my field, your brain is your currency,” she said.
“I know my value in many people’s eyes will be diminished by knowing that I have these cognitive challenges.”
Patients struggle to make peace with how much they’ve changed and the stigma associated with it, regardless of where they end up.
Their desperation to return to normal can be dangerous, especially when combined with cultural norms around pressing on through challenges and post-exertional malaise—severe crashes in which all symptoms worsen after even minor physical or mental exertion.
Many long-haulers try to push themselves back to work and instead “push themselves into a crash,” Robertson told me.
When she tried to force her way to normalcy, she became mostly housebound for a year, needing full-time care.
Even now, if she tries to concentrate in the middle of a bad day, “I end up with a physical reaction of exhaustion and pain, like I’ve run a marathon,” she said.
Post-exertional malaise is so common among long-haulers that “exercise as a treatment is inappropriate for people with long COVID,” Putrino said.
Even brain-training games—which have questionable value but are often mentioned as potential treatments for brain fog—must be very carefully rationed because mental exertion is physical exertion.
People with ME/CFS learned this lesson the hard way, and fought hard to get exercise therapy, once commonly prescribed for the condition, to be removed from official guidance in the U.S. and U.K. They’ve also learned the value of pacing—carefully sensing and managing their energy levels to avoid crashes.
Vogel does this with a wearable that tracks her heart rate, sleep, activity, and stress as a proxy for her energy levels; if they feel low, she forces herself to rest—cognitively as well as physically.
Checking social media or responding to emails do not count.
In those moments, “you have to accept that you have this medical crisis and the best thing you can do is literally nothing,” she said.
When stuck in a fog, sometimes the only option is to stand still.
“Thousands of COVID-19 deaths could have been prevented statewide if California had better air quality, a new study finds.
That’s especially true in the San Joaquin Valley, one of the state’s two most polluted regions.
An estimated 9% of COVID-19-related deaths statewide — or about 4,250 deaths — could have been avoided between February 2020 and February 2021 if California’s levels of fine particulate matter, or PM 2.5, registered within national air quality standards, according to researchers from the Public Health Institute and UC San Francisco.
The researchers studied neighborhood-level air pollution data, examining over 3 million COVID-19 infections and about 50,000 COVID-19 deaths in the early months of the pandemic.
They found that people living in neighborhoods exposed to the highest levels of air pollution had a 20% higher risk of COVID-19 infections, a 51% higher risk of COVID-19 mortality and were likely to be Latino and from low-income communities.
The South Coast and San Joaquin Valley air basins have the highest PM 2.5 concentrations in the state.
CNN —
With waning immunity and a coronavirus that seems to become more infectious with each new variant, the Biden administration predicts that up to 100 million more people could get Covid-19 in the fall and winter.
That estimate makes it crucial that as many people as possible get booster shots of Covid-19 vaccine, experts say.
And if you’re eligible, it’s a good time to get a second booster.
Less than half of eligible Americans – only about a third of the total US population – have gotten a first booster dose, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Only about 10 million people have received a second booster, which is authorized for people 50 and older, along with those who are 12 and older who are moderately to severely immunocompromised.
The CDC encourages people to be “up-to-date” on Covid-19 vaccinations – which includes getting boosters at the appropriate time – but still defines a person to be “fully vaccinated” if they’ve received at least their initial vaccination series.
But this week, a senior Biden administration official was more direct: All adults need a third shot.
Vaccination is the best way for individuals to protect themselves against Covid-19, and protection is most effective with at least three shots, the official said.
Getting more Americans boosted against Covid-19 could make a big difference as far as case numbers go, according to Dr. Peter Marks, director of the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research at the US Food and Drug Administration.
He told the American Medical Association on Monday that he is “a little concerned” about where the Covid-19 pandemic is heading.
“It’s really important that we try to get the half – or a little bit more than a half – of Americans who have only received two doses to get that third dose,” Marks said.
“That may make a difference moving forward here, and it may particularly make a difference now that we’re coming into yet another wave of Covid-19.”
The current rising Covid cases are nothing like what the US saw with the initial Omicron surge, but as of Monday, the US is averaging 71,577 new cases a day, according to Johns Hopkins University.
Case rates are currently highest in the Northeast region of the US, where booster uptake is best.
Nearly half of Vermont’s population is fully vaccinated and boosted, along with more than 40% of the population in Maine, Rhode Island, Connecticut and Massachusetts, according to CDC data.
But cases are also starting to tick up in the South, where less than a quarter of the population is fully vaccinated and boosted.
In North Carolina, Alabama and Mississippi, less than 1 in 5 people have received their booster shot.
Who’s getting – and not getting – boosters
Everyone in the US who is 12 and older is eligible for a booster dose.
Only the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine is available as a booster for adolescents 12 to 17.
Adults who were initially vaccinated with the mRNA vaccine are eligible for a booster dose five months after the initial series.
Those vaccinated with Johnson & Johnson are eligible for a booster dose two months after their first shot.
CDC data shows that booster uptake is higher in older age groups in the US, consistent with broader vaccination trends.
But nearly 2 out of 5 seniors age 65 and older – and more than 3 out of 5 adults overall – do not have either of their booster shots.
People who get three doses of an mRNA vaccine have a relatively low rate of Covid-related urgent care visits and hospitalizations compared with those who got only two doses, studies have shown.
Even with the more infectious Omicron variant, a booster seems to protect against more severe disease.
Scientists are still trying to determine whether younger age groups would benefit from an additional vaccine dose.
Pfizer and BioNTech have requested emergency use authorization for the 5-to-11 age range.
“That will hopefully be acted on in the not-too-distant future,” Marks said.
New research on fourth doses
A fourth dose of Moderna or Pfizer/BioNTech’s mRNA Covid-19 vaccine – which is already authorized for people 50 and older in the United States – seems safe and provides a “substantial” boost to immunity at similar or even better levels than a third dose, according to a study published Monday.
The researchers gave study participants whose median age was 70.1 years a half dose of the Moderna vaccine or a full dose of the Pfizer vaccine in a random selection in January, about seven months after they received their first booster.
The second booster didn’t seem to have any major side effects.
The biggest complaints were arm pain and fatigue.
The booster also generated an immune response at day 14 that was higher than that at day 28 after the third dose of the Pfizer or Moderna Covid-19 vaccine.
When the researchers compared the mRNA vaccines, Moderna’s fourth dose seemed to do slightly better than Pfizer’s, but it’s unclear why.
Both generated what scientists considered a “significant fold change” in protective antibodies.
T-cell responses were also boosted after the fourth dose.
Antibodies are a first line of immune protection that can stop a virus from infecting cells.
T-cells come in later and destroy infected cells.
T-cells can’t protect against mild infections, but they can keep infections from progressing to severe disease.
“Fourth-dose Covid-19 mRNA booster vaccines are well tolerated and boost cellular and humoral immunity,” the study says.
“Peak responses after the fourth dose were similar to, and possibly better than, peak responses after the third dose.”
The study also showed that some people who had higher levels of antibodies before the fourth dose of the Covid-19 vaccine had only “limited” boosting.
Those with a history of Covid-19 infection had a similar limited response.
The authors say this suggests that there may be a ceiling or maximum response that can come with a fourth vaccine dose.
The study didn’t look specifically at neutralization of the Omicron variant.
Two earlier studies out of Israel showed that hospitalization and death rates from Covid-19 could be reduced with a fourth vaccine dose given at least four months after the third dose.
The reduction in hospitalizations and death persisted over time with this fourth shot.
New generation of vaccines and boosters
Marks hopes that the next generation of Covid-19 vaccines – which he predicts will come in the next year or two – will be even better at protecting people against the “whole variety” of Covid variants and provide a more robust immune response.
The FDA’s vaccine advisory committee will meet in late June to review the data on vaccines, including monovalent (which would target a single variant) and bivalent vaccines (which could target the original strain of the virus plus another).
“It’s a little bit of a challenge here because we don’t know how much further the virus will evolve over the next few months,” Marks said.
“But we have no choice, because if we want to produce the hundreds of millions of doses that need to be available for a booster campaign, we have to start in the early July timeframe or even sooner to get those kinds of numbers.”
The FDA committee may also discuss whether an additional booster should be recommended in the fall for the general population or for target groups, Marks said.
Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.
Some doctors have said they’ve heard from patients who want to wait to get a booster to get better coverage for winter.
Marks said that waiting to get a booster is a bad idea, especially if those people haven’t had Covid-19 recently.
“Why?
Because it’s going to be four or five, six months before we get to when you get your next booster,” he said.
“You’re talking about having several months there at risk.”
Even with a fall and winter surge predicted, cases are on the increase now, and those who have had only two mRNA shots are vulnerable.
“Rather than just being casual about it,” Marks said.
“I would urge them to try to get that third dose to ramp up the immunity just because we do have plenty of circulating Covid-19.”
For those experiencing COVID symptoms or who have been exposed to the virus, at-home COVID test kits are an easy way to detect negative or positive COVID cases.
However, all at-home COVID tests, including the free ones sent out from the federal government by the United States Postal Service, are only good to use through a certain date.
According to the Food Drug Administration, at-home COVID tests have both a specific shelf-life, and a specific expiration date.
"The shelf-life is how long the test should perform as expected and is measured from the date the test was manufactured," the FDA says.
"The expiration date listed on the box label for at-home COVID-19 tests is set at the end of the shelf-life, and is the date through which the test is expected to perform as accurately as when manufactured.
Typically, the FDA authorizes an at-home COVID shelf-life of about four to six months from the time the test was made, the agency says.
However, once the test manufacturer has more "stability testing results," such as 12 or 18 months, the test manufacturer can contact the FDA to request that the agency authorize a longer shelf-life.
According to the FDA, stability testing is "where the manufacturer stores the tests for the time period of the proposed shelf-life (plus a little extra time to ensure the expiration date can be relied upon) and then evaluates its ability to perform accurately.
"
Then, after reviewing the results of the testing, the FDA can choose to extend the kit's expiration date.
Here's a look at all the at-home COVID tests the CDC says are approved by the FDA, and the shelf life of each kit.
BinaxNOW COVID-19 Ag Card Home Test , 15 months
, 15 months BinaxNOW COVID-19 Antigen Self Test , 15 months
, 15 months CareStart COVID-19
Antigen Home Test (alternate name is "on/go") , 12 months
, 12 months Flowflex COVID-19 Antigen Home Test, 16 months
16 months BD Veritor At-Home COVID-19 Test , 6 months
, 6 months Celltrion DiaTrust COVID-19 Ag Home Test , 18 months
, 18 months Cue COVID-19 Test for Home and Over The Counter (OTC) Use , 4 months
, 4 months Detect Covid-19 Test , 12 months
, 12 months Ellume COVID-19 Home Test , 12 months
, 12 months Genabio COVID-19 Rapid Self-Test Kit , 18 months
, 18 months iHealth COVID-19
Antigen Rapid Test (alternate name is "Good to Know") , 12 months
, 12 months SCoV-2 Ag Detect Rapid Self-Test , 13 months
, 13 months Lucira CHECK-IT COVID-19 Test Kit , 18 months
, 18 months MaximBio ClearDetect COVID-19 Antigen Home Test , 8 months
, 8 months InteliSwab COVID-19 Rapid Test , 12 months
, 12 months OHC COVID-19 Antigen Self Test , 8 months
, 8 months INDICAID COVID-19 Rapid Antigen At-Home Test , 12 months
, 12 months
QuickVue At-Home OTC COVID-19 Test , 12 months
, 12 months Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test 1 , 9 months
, 9 months CLINITEST Rapid COVID-19 Antigen Self-Test , 11 months
, 11 months Speedy Swab Rapid COVID-19 Antigen Self-Test , 6 months
, 6 months Rapid SARS-CoV-2 Antigen Test Card, 6 months
According to the FDA, the expiration date of each varies, and should be listed on the box.
Feeling out of the loop?
We'll catch you up on the Chicago news you need to know.
Sign up for the weekly Chicago Catch-Up newsletter here.
While the CDC asserts "positive results from self-tests are highly reliable," it admits negative results may not necessarily rule out infection, particularly in those who are symptomatic.
And, under revised guidance from the FDA, individuals who have been exposed to COVID-19 may need to take as many as three at-home tests to ensure that they are not experiencing asymptomatic infections.
According to the CDC, tests do not need to be taken only by those experiencing symptoms.
And while there is currently no requirement to test out of isolation after having COVID, Chicago's top doctor has warned that the new BA.5 omicron subvariant is making people test positive longer.
"So just a reminder if you catch COVID, regardless of your vaccination status, you need to stay home for five days," Chicago Department of Public Health Commissioner Dr. Allison Arwady said during a recent Facebook live update.
"If your symptoms are resolving, are gone by day five, you can leave your house, but you must continue to mask while around others for days six to 10.
We're seeing some examples, especially with the BA.4 and [BA.5] of people testing positive for longer, occasionally testing negative and then positive again later."
Key Takeaways Experts say that interacting with other infected people will unlikely make your COVID-19 infection longer or worse.
But this doesn’t mean that you should fill up your social calendar while you’re trying to recover from the virus.
You should still try to isolate alone or only with your household members to limit the risk of spreading the virus.
If you have COVID-19, the current guideline is to isolate yourself for at least five days to avoid infecting other people.
But what happens if you interact with people who also tested positive for COVID-19?
Will that make your sickness longer or worse?
The current answer is “no,” according to Andrew Pekosz, PhD, a virologist and researcher at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
Pekosz explained that the COVID-19 virus operates differently once it’s inside the body compared to outside.
When you have COVID-19, your body can emit up to 100 billion viral particles during peak infection.
But if you encounter other COVID-19 carriers while you’re infected, they may not transmit as many particles to you, and your viral loads may not increase drastically.
You’ll likely maintain some COVID-19 resistance immediately after your quarantine, too.
That’s because the body creates interferons, a type of virus-induced protein that provides short-term protection from new infections.
“That was essentially named because it interferes with another virus infection,” Pekosz said.
“We see that with other viruses as well, that there’s a period of time after you’re sick that you really are resistant to infection,” he said.
What Happens If You’re Exposed to COVID-19 Again While You’re Infected?
“Deltacron” taught us it is possible for people to develop co-infections from different COVID variants at the same time.
But experts say developing one while you’re already infected likely won’t change your recovery timeframe.
Can You Still See Your Friends If You’re Both Infected?
Available data doesn’t suggest hanging out with an infectious friend during quarantine will make your infection longer or worse.
But that doesn’t mean doctors recommend filling up your social calendar while you have COVID-19.
Laolu Fayanju, MD, a family medicine specialist at Oak Street Health, a healthcare provider primarily serving older adults, said that seeing other infected people while you’re recovering may not “be the most prudent thing to do.”
“If this virus has taught us anything, it’s to err on the side of caution,” Fayanju told Verywell.
Instead, Fayanju recommends isolating alone or only with your household members to limit opportunities for the virus to spread or grow.
However, his advice for people who live together is different.
A couple who shares a bedroom, for example, may want to quarantine themselves together.
This is generally a safe thing to do, particularly if neither person is going outside, Fayanju added.
“More than anything, the real focus is on folks who are not sick,” he said.
“You don’t want them to be around you if you’re infected or have symptoms.”
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention currently has no clear guidance on whether you should isolate with your loved ones if you all tested positive, but it recommends avoiding being around people who are at high risk of severe illness.
People should be extra vigilant to avoid those who are immunocompromised, older, or in vulnerable groups, as COVID-19 is still a deadly virus, and symptoms can be debilitating, Fayanju added.
“However mild symptoms may be, we have to continue to exercise a high degree of caution and be very careful about getting sick,” Fayanju said.
“We are seeing cases and hospitalizations going up, and unfortunately we’re also seeing death rates going up across the country.
So this is still a very serious illness.”
What This Means For You If you have COVID-19, hanging out with other infected people probably won’t harm your recovery.
However, you should still follow public health protocols and isolate yourself from people who are not sick.
The information in this article is current as of the date listed, which means newer information may be available when you read this.
For the most recent updates on COVID-19, visit our coronavirus news page.
Here's what we know about North Korea's COVID outbreak — and its ability to handle it
Enlarge this image toggle caption Lee Jin-man/AP Lee Jin-man/AP
It's been more than two years since the pandemic began and in that time North Korea has claimed to have had zero COVID cases.
But now the country's government has said it is experiencing its first outbreak, though it is still not labeling what people have as COVID.
On Wednesday, North Korean state media said more than 1.7 million people had experienced fevers and 62 people had died since late April — but those numbers are hard to confirm, according to journalist Jean Lee, who specialized on North Korea.
North Korea does not have enough COVID tests to confirm that all the patients have the virus, and the country of 26 million people has still not reported any official cases to the World Health Organization, Lee said.
The lack of tests and the fact that there are no outside observers inside North Korea make getting an accurate picture of what's happening inside the country — and confirming all cases of fever are indeed the coronavirus — extremely difficult.
"Kim Jong Un is painting this as the first outbreak of COVID in North Korea, but I find that very hard to believe because North Korea shares a very long border with China, and there would have been many people going across the border between China and North Korea in the early weeks of the outbreak in 2019 and early 2020," Lee said.
"And so it's hard to imagine that the virus didn't didn't make its way to Pyongyang.
"
Enlarge this image toggle caption Kim Won Jin/AFP via Getty Images Kim Won Jin/AFP via Getty Images
Why North Korea would admit to an outbreak now
Lee said that acknowledging a COVID outbreak now could be a political move by Kim.
"He has spent his energy shutting the world out during a period when he needed to focus on boosting his legacy, and now I think his attention is shifting," she said.
"And part of this might be a calculation to re-engage with the outside world.
"
It is also possible that COVID has reached a point where it is no longer feasible for North Korea to ignore or deal with it on its own, Lee said.
But it could be the case, she added, that Kim sees the election of Yoon Suk Yeol as South Korea's new president, and an upcoming summit between Yoon and President Biden, as an opportunity to re-establish communication, especially if North Korea says it has an outbreak.
North Korea has refused help in the past though.
The country declined millions of vaccines that were offered by the U.N.-backed COVAX initiative earlier in the pandemic, and as NPR's Anthony Kuhn reports, the country has not publicly accepted offers of vaccines and medical assistance from China and South Korea since this outbreak began.
"There is speculation that they don't trust the drugs, or they don't want to be seen to be depending on outside help," Kuhn said.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Kim Won Jin/AFP via Getty Images Kim Won Jin/AFP via Getty Images
Can North Korea handle an outbreak on its own?
North Korea's government has declared a nationwide emergency, and a lockdown has been instituted within the country as its military is working to distribute medicine.
This, along with outspoken criticism from Kim of how North Korean officials have handled the outbreak, raises questions on whether the country has the medical infrastructure to respond to the crisis.
Previously, North Korean officials have said they are not well-equipped to deal with this, Kuhn said, noting that many hospitals in rural areas of the country lack ventilators and other basic equipment, as well as essential utilities including water and electricity.
There's also the issue of malnutrition in the country, which is a chronic issue facing nearly 40% of the population.
"They don't have the kind of nutrients that the average human being needs to withstand illness, and on top of that they're not vaccinated," Lee said.
"It's hard for me to imagine how without vaccination, without medication, without robust health, how they will survive even a milder variant."
A new UN report shows that women’s and children’s health has suffered globally, as the impacts of conflict, the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change converge with devastating effects on prospects for children, young people and women.
Data presented in the report show a critical regression across virtually every major measure of childhood well-being, and many key indicators of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Since the last Every Woman Every Child Progress Report published in 2020, food insecurity, hunger, child marriage, risks from intimate partner violence, and adolescent depression and anxiety have all increased.
An estimated 25 million children were un- or under-vaccinated in 2021 – 6 million more than in 2019 - increasing their risk of contracting deadly and debilitating diseases.
Millions of children missed out on school during the pandemic, many for more than a year, while approximately 80% of children in 104 countries and territories experienced learning-loss because of school closures.
Since the start of the global pandemic, 10.5 million children lost a parent or caregiver to COVID-19.
“At the core of our unkept promise is the failure to address the gaping inequities at the root of global crises, from the COVID-19 pandemic to conflicts and the climate emergency.
The report describes the impacts of these crises on women, children and adolescents, from maternal mortality to education losses to severe malnutrition,” said Antonio Guterres, United Nations Secretary-General.
The report provides wide-ranging evidence that children and adolescents face wildly divergent chances of leading a healthy life simply based on where they are born, their exposure to conflict, and the economic circumstances of their families.
For example:
A child born in a low-income country has an average life expectancy at birth of around 63 years, compared to 80 in a high-income country.
This devastating 17-year survival gap has changed little over recent years.
In 2020, 5 million children died even before the age of 5, mostly from preventable or treatable causes.
Meanwhile, most maternal, child, and adolescent deaths and stillbirths are concentrated in just two regions – sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia.
More than 45 million children had acute malnutrition in 2020, a life-threatening condition which leaves them vulnerable to death, developmental delays and disease.
Nearly three-quarters of these children live in lower-middle-income countries.
A staggering 149 million children were stunted in 2020.
Africa is the only region where the numbers of children affected by stunting increased over the past 20 years, from 54.4 million in 2000 to 61.4 million in 2020.
The six countries with the highest numbers of internally displaced persons – Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen – are also among the top 10 food insecure countries.
A woman in sub-Saharan Africa has around a 130 times higher risk of dying from causes relating to pregnancy or childbirth than a woman in Europe or North America.
Coverage of antenatal care, skilled birth attendance, and postnatal care is far from reaching all women in low- and middle- income countries, leaving them at elevated risk of death and disability.
Millions of children and their families are experiencing poor physical and mental health from recent humanitarian disasters in Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Pakistan, Somalia, Ukraine and Yemen.
In 2021, a record 89.3 million people worldwide were driven from their homes by war, violence, persecution, and human rights abuse.
The report calls upon the global community to address this damaging trajectory and protect the promises made to women, children, and adolescents in the Sustainable Development Goals.
In particular, it advocates for countries to continue investing in health services, to address all crises and food insecurity, and empower women and young people around the world.
The report, titled Protect the Promise, is published by global partners, including WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, Partnership for Maternal, Newborn & Child Health (PMNCH) and Countdown to 2030, as a bi-annual summary of progress in response to the UN Secretary General's Every Woman Every Child Global Strategy for Women, Children's and Adolescents' Health.
The most comprehensive synthesis of evidence on the current state of maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health, it updates the last Every Woman Every Child Global Strategy Progress Report published in 2020.
Quote sheet:
“Almost three years on from the onset of COVID-19, the pandemic’s long-term impact on the health and well-being of women, children and adolescents is becoming evident: their chances for healthy and productive lives have declined sharply,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General.
“As the world emerges from the pandemic, protecting and promoting the health of women, children and young people is essential for supporting and sustaining the global recovery.”
“The impacts of COVID-19, conflicts, and climate crises have raised the stakes for vulnerable communities, revealing the weaknesses and inequities in health care systems and reversing hard-won progress for women, children, and adolescents – but we are not powerless to change this,” said UNICEF Executive Catherine Russell.
“By investing in resilient, inclusive primary health care systems, jumpstarting routine immunization programmes, and strengthening the health workforce, we can make sure that every woman and every child can access the care they need to survive and thrive.”
“There is a crisis of inequity that is piling on already increasing and compounding threats.
In a world where too many children, adolescents and women are dying, equity, empowerment and access are what needs urgent focus,” said H.E. Ms. Kersti Kaljulaid, Global Advocate for Every Woman Every Child and President of the Republic of Estonia, 2016-2021.
“We are calling on all to think and act broadly and profoundly to protect the promise.
This promise refers not only to the commitments made in the Sustainable Development Goals, and all of the campaigns that followed, but also to the larger promise of potential that everyone is born with.
Too often this promise remains unclaimed, or even denied.”
“In the face of increasing political pushback against sexual and reproductive health and rights in many countries, women, children and adolescents today are left without many of the protections of just a decade ago, and many others still have not seen the progress they need,” said Dr. Natalia Kanem, UNFPA Executive Director.
“Access to sexual and reproductive health services, including contraception, is a fundamental right that directly and acutely affects the ability of women and adolescent girls to thrive.
We need to expand these rights and services to the most marginalized, leaving no one behind.”
“The report advocates for countries to continue investing in health services, in all crises, and to re-imagine health systems that can truly reach every woman, child, and adolescent, no matter who they are or where they live,” said the Rt.
Hon Helen Clark, Board Chair of PMNCH (The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn & Child Health) and former Prime Minister of New Zealand.
“Experts and world leaders are calling for more women in policy- and decision-making at every level, meaningful engagement with young people, and primary health care systems which deliver what people need when and where they need it most.”
###
Notes to editor:
Download multimedia content here
Access infographics and data here
The report will be launched at the World Health Summit in Berlin on 18 October 2022 at 9 AM GMT+2 at a session where the findings will be discussed by world leaders and young people.
The session can be joined in person or virtually.
Speakers include:
Young children have been the only major group of Americans left unprotected against COVID-19 with no authorized vaccines available for them.
And with COVID-19 cases in young children surging during the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant and subvariant waves, parents have been left worrying about when their kids would be eligible for this vital form of protection.
Half the dues, all the AMA benefits!
AMA membership offers unique access to savings and resources tailored to enrich the personal and professional lives of physicians, residents and medical students.
Learn More
But the wait is over and children 6 months of age and older in the U.S. are now eligible to receive Moderna or Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccines.
Having two vaccines for this pediatric population provides a choice for parents who are eager to get their children vaccinated.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) accepted the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices to recommend the use of the Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccines for nearly 20 million children who are younger than 5.
This comes after the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee unanimously voted to recommend emergency use authorization (EUA) of the vaccines for children on June 15, based on the determination that the benefits of the COVID-19 vaccines outweighed the risks in this population.
The FDA issued EUAs for both of these vaccines for the youngest kids on June 17.
“To unanimously recommend use of both the Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccines for children as young as six months of age is a vital step in protecting many more children from COVID-19,” said Jack Resneck Jr., MD, president of the AMA.
“Many parents across the U.S. have anxiously awaited a safe and effective COVID-19 vaccine for their children—having foregone normal daily activities for the past several years to protect their youngest children from the virus.
Parents will breathe a sigh of relief knowing these vaccines will very soon be available,” Dr. Resneck added.
Last week, administration officials started accepting state and local orders for COVID-19 vaccines.
They expected to have 5 million doses each of Pfizer and Moderna COVID-19 vaccines available June 21 for infants and young children.
Millions more were set to be available soon thereafter.
When physicians are counseling parents with infants, toddlers or preschoolers about Moderna or Pfizer COVID-19 vaccines for their children, there are three major reasons to vaccinate that doctors should review.
Both vaccines are safe and effective Both vaccines are safe and effective
The Moderna vaccine primary series for children 6 months through 5 years old is administered in two 25-microgram doses given four to eight weeks apart.
The shots were about 40–50% effective at preventing milder Omicron SARS-CoV-2 infections in young children.
Acknowledging the lower efficacy, Moderna expects children in this age group to be offered a booster dose at some point in time.
The Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine primary series for children 6 months to 4 years old is administered in three 3-microgram doses.
The first and second doses are separated by three to eight weeks and the second and third doses are separated by at least eight weeks.
Three doses of the Pfizer vaccine were shown to be 80% effective in preventing symptomatic COVID-19.
Both the Moderna and Pfizer vaccines were shown to have similar side effects, which included pain at the injection site, irritability, drowsiness and fever.
“While there is overwhelming scientific evidence showing the COVID-19 vaccines are safe and effective, we know many parents and families still have questions,” said Dr. Resneck.
“We encourage parents to speak with their child’s physician and review trusted resources, such as getvaccineanswers.org, to get the information they need to make an informed decision.
“We also encourage the use of v-safe, a smartphone-based tool that helps the CDC monitor COVID-19 vaccine safety,” he added.
Learn what doctors wish parents knew about kids' COVID-19 vaccine safety.
Vaccination prevents hospitalization Vaccination prevents hospitalization
While younger children are typically spared the worst effects of COVID-19, severe cases and deaths can still occur.
But rates of hospitalization are slowly increasing for young children 6 months to 4 years old.
Due to the dominance of the Omicron variant, which began in late December, hospitalization rates of infants and children under 5 are five times the rate of the previous peak seen with the COVID-19 Delta variant, according to the CDC.
This is a major reason why experts have emphasized the ongoing importance and need to protect the youngest children.
“Since the beginning of the pandemic, among children in the U.S. aged 6 months to 4 years, there have been more than 2 million cases of COVID-19, more than 20,000 hospitalizations, and more than 200 deaths,” said Dr. Resneck.
“We urge parents to get their children vaccinated against COVID-19 as soon as they are eligible.”
“It is imperative that all parents in all jurisdictions have access to the vaccine for infants and children and we are hopeful that millions more children will receive the vaccine in the coming weeks and months—reducing their risk of COVID-19 infection, hospitalization, and death,” he said.
Discover striking CDC data to share with COVID-19 vaccine-hesitant parents.
Related Coverage COVID-19 vaccine dosing is top challenge for kids under 5
Benefits go beyond prevention Benefits go beyond prevention
Getting kids vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2 can also reduce their odds of developing further complications such as long COVID and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
Authorization of Moderna and Pfizer COVID-19 vaccines for younger children also offers some freedom to families who have practiced a higher degree of physical distancing until their youngest members could be vaccinated.
But babies younger than 6 months will not be expected to receive a COVID-19 vaccine.
Instead, vaccination during pregnancy is highly recommended because it can pass on protection that lasts for the first six months of the baby’s life.
To stay informed on the latest COVID-19 news on vaccines, treatments and guidance, visit the AMA COVID-19 resource center for physicians.
The AMA has also developed frequently-asked-questions documents on COVID-19 vaccination covering safety, allocation and distribution, administration and more.
There are two FAQs, one designed to answer patients’ questions (PDF), and another to address physicians’ COVID-19 vaccine questions (PDF).
A pharmacist prepares to administer Covid-19 vaccine booster shots during an event hosted by the Chicago Department of Public Health at the Southwest Senior Center in Chicago, Illinois, Sept. 9, 2022.
New Covid vaccines from Pfizer , Moderna and Novavax will likely provide protection against the new "Eris" variant, now the dominant strain of the virus in the U.S.
The drugmakers designed their updated vaccines to target the omicron subvariant XBB.1.5, which is slowly declining nationwide.
But health experts and initial data suggest that the new shots will still be effective against Eris, or EG.5, and other widely circulating variants – all of which are descendants of omicron.
"I think that these vaccines will provide very substantial protection against EG.5.
Maybe just a little bit of loss, but it's nothing that I'm very concerned about," Dr. Mark Mulligan, director of the NYU Langone Vaccine Center, told CNBC.
"It looks like we're going to be OK.
"
All three companies are still waiting for the Food and Drug Administration to approve their vaccines, meaning those jabs won't be available to the public for a month or so.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also has to decide which Americans should get the shots and how often.
Still, the upcoming arrival of those vaccines offers some reassurance to Americans as Eris and other Covid variants fuel a slight uptick in cases and hospitalizations across the country but remain below the summer peak that strained hospitals this time last year.
Eris accounted for 17.3% of all cases in the U.S. as of earlier this month, according to the latest data from the CDC.
The new strain surpassed XBB.1.5, which accounted for roughly 10% of all cases.
The World Health Organization earlier this month designated Eris a "variant of interest," meaning it will be monitored for mutations that could potentially make it more severe.
But the health agency and experts said Eris does not appear to pose a significant threat – or at least no more than any of the other omicron variants currently circulating in the U.S.
It's also not expected to cause a huge wave of Covid cases like other strains have in previous years.
Myocarditis is a rare side effect of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines, which have been used with great success as protection against the SARS CoV-2 virus and its variants.
Generally, the condition is highly treatable, but it has caused concern in some quarters about the vaccines’ safety.
We spoke with Carrie Lucas, PhD, associate professor of immunobiology at Yale School of Medicine, and Akiko Iwasaki, PhD, Sterling Professor of Immunobiology, about their recent study which uncovers clues to why this complication can occur.
What is myocarditis?
Lucas:
Myocarditis is inflammation of the heart muscle.
It occurs most commonly after an infection but can also be triggered by other things.
There are several forms of myocarditis, but generally, what they all have in common is the inflamed heart muscle.
What is the likelihood of developing myocarditis post-vaccination, and who is most at risk?
Iwasaki: Myocarditis risk depends on the age and sex of the vaccine recipient.
It is most common in younger males—adolescents or young adults.
The highest risk group is males between 12 and 17 years of age.
And in that highest risk group, the myocarditis risk after the second dose, which is the highest, is 35.9 per 100,000 people.
In comparison, the risk post-infection in that same group is 64.9 per 100,000.
What were your hypotheses for why this happens, and how did you test them?
Iwasaki: We considered three hypotheses.
One is autoimmune myocarditis, which is when the immune cells start to attack our own host cells.
This can be serious, because once you generate autoimmune responses, it’s difficult to revert back to baseline.
Our second hypothesis was myocarditis caused by hypersensitivity.
This is an allergic response that some people experience after drug toxicity that is demarcated by these cell types known as eosinophils.
Eosinophils are normally immune effectors that are activated during an allergic response but can also be activated in response to other stimuli, including drugs or potentially components of the vaccine.
And then the third hypothesis is the one that we found to be most likely, which is inflammation-related myocarditis.
This is immune cell mediated.
We found that activated immune cells like cytotoxic killer cells and myeloid cells are elevated in these patients, which appears to suggest that mRNA vaccine-associated myocarditis is the most consistent with being inflammatory cell-mediated.
Professor Iwasaki, you have said you are “a little relieved” to have found myocarditis cases to be inflammation-induced.
Why is that?
Iwasaki: Autoimmune-related myocarditis is more difficult to treat.
It would be more chronic, because once you trigger an autoimmune response, it’s very difficult to shut it down.
For example, if you develop auto antibodies against components of the cardiac muscle, it’s difficult to get rid of those B cells that are secreting those antibodies, creating chronic disease.
Whereas inflammation-induced myocarditis is more transient—we actually found that inflammation as well as the immune cell types go back to normal after patients recover.
So we know that it’s a resolving kind of myocarditis.
We don’t want to diminish patients’ suffering, but this kind of myocarditis is better than other types.
Lucas:
The other thing that’s good is how treatable it is.
Something empirically that our clinical colleagues have found is that treatments like NSAIDs or steroids—temporary measures that can calm the inflammation back down—can help these young patients bounce back quickly.
Another point is that if you space the dosing of the mRNA vaccines far enough apart, you might allow time for the waning of the inflammatory response and reduce the risk of myocarditis.
That’s still yet to be widely tested, but because of the nature of the inflammation, it’s a very plausible possibility.
For those at risk of developing myocarditis, is vaccination or becoming infected with SARS-CoV-2 safer?
Iwasaki: It’s hard to compare head-to-head, but it’s important to remember that with infection, you not only get myocarditis, but you also get all these other symptoms and damage to your lungs and other organs.
You could also develop long COVID.
There are many other sequelae (residual effects) after infection than after vaccination, which causes a more transient type of myocarditis.
Lucas: Studies have also shown that the severity of disease and length of recovery are greater in myocarditis post-COVID, in contrast to this transient experience of inflammation after vaccination.
Why are men more at risk than women?
Iwasaki: There could be many reasons—genetics, hormones, potentially environment.
In the cases of myocarditis that occur after viral infections, animal models have studied the impact of testosterone.
In these studies, testosterone was involved in some of the features that we see in vaccine-associated myocarditis.
So it’s possible testosterone may be involved in vaccine-related myocarditis, but we don’t have any proof of it.
Why can the mRNA vaccine affect the heart?
Lucas:
This is a question we have thought a lot about but one we can’t yet answer.
We can propose some hypotheses, but why the heart tissue is affected and not other tissues in the body is not known.
One speculation is based on our thinking about the different organ systems.
In our analyses, some of the cells associated with inflammation have signatures consistent with immune molecules that can recognize what we call ‘stress ligands’ on tissue cells.
And you can imagine, the heart pumping and the mechanical stress that it experiences could make it express some of these ligands more than other tissues.
But again, this is pure speculation and more studies would be needed to be able to figure out why the heart and not other tissues—we don’t have data on that directly.
Why are studies on the adverse effects of vaccines important?
Iwasaki: We both think vaccines are just a miracle.
They saved millions of lives during this pandemic.
But no medicine is without any side effects.
So vaccines, unfortunately, in a subset of people, are causing some inflammation and other adverse events.
So it’s very important that we understand better what those adverse events are and how they’re mediated so that we can improve on the already amazing vaccines that we have, and also to mitigate any risks further in the future.
For instance, a study from Canada that showed that spacing apart the first and second dose does seem to reduce the risk for developing myocarditis.
Every insight can be used to help future vaccines become safer.
What would you like to say to those concerned about getting vaccinated due to myocarditis risk?
Iwasaki:
First of all, myocarditis after vaccination for the most part appears to be transient, and these patients recover.
In comparison, getting COVID could lead to more severe, more prolonged myocarditis.
Secondly, there are ways to reduce the risk for myocarditis, like spacing apart the first and second dose.
And now that we have seen enough of these cases, doctors are learning how to treat these events when they do occur.
And it’s also important to emphasize that instances of myocarditis have not been seen after the booster doses.
So it’s mostly confined to the second dose of the primary series, and we shouldn’t be expecting these things to occur for future booster doses.
And if the COVID boosters become like an annual flu vaccine, we wouldn’t expect myocarditis to occur because they are spaced so far apart.
Lucas:
Awareness about these things is important.
For males in this age group, if they experience some of the signs—chest pain, shortness of breath, etc.—to take it seriously and go get treatment, because again, it can be treated with anti-inflammatory medicines.
And the sooner it is treated, the sooner it will resolve.
But with the wider spacing now, we hope this won’t be an issue.
I think it’s also important to remember that the community has seen this signal for myocarditis during the pandemic because everyone was synchronized in the timing of getting the vaccines.
But this isn’t the only vaccine that induced myocarditis.
There are others, such as the smallpox vaccine, that can also on rare occasion cause a similar thing.
So we hope that our studies are informing these rare cases and will help us strategize how to reduce risk further.
Do you have any further research planned?
Lucas:
One thing that I think that would be very exciting is to study what’s happening in the tissue.
This is not something we’re yet capable of doing because in our cohorts, we don't have access to these samples.
Our study was restricted to clinical analyses and imaging of the heart with investigation of immune cells and molecules from blood samples, but we didn’t do any cellular analysis of the affected tissue since this would require biopsies.
So future studies with colleagues who may have collected such biopsies during care of these patients can hopefully corroborate our findings from the blood using tissue samples.
Anything else you would like to add?
Iwasaki: I want to emphasize that it’s important to study these events in a rigorous manner.
We’re hearing a lot on Twitter that people are very appreciative that we are actually studying this and not dismissing the cases.
And the more we understand, the less fear that people will have about these things.
So I think it’s important that we continue to study these events as they emerge.
The Washington Post is providing this news free to all readers as a public service.
Follow this story and more by signing up for national breaking news email alerts.
Good Morning Britain's Kate Garraway has revealed she will take her husband Derek Draper to Mexico for a second bout of experimental treatment in a desperate bid to save him from the devastating effects of Covid.
Kate has cared for Derek, both 55, ever since he became unwell with Long Covid in 2020 after becoming gravely ill with the virus at the onset of the pandemic.
Derek fought for his life after contracting the virus in March 2020.
He was rushed to hospital in an ambulance where he was placed on a ventilator and in an induced coma.
Following a previously 'gruelling' trip to Mexico at the beginning of 2022, Kate hopes to fly Derek back for an additional round of treatment.
Kate told The Sun: 'The effort required to get him there is extraordinary, and obviously we are relying on the grace of these specialists to help him.
Kate revealed that she plans to fly out her husband, Derek, both 55 (pictured together), to Mexico for another round of medical treatment that they hope will be 'life changing'
Derek became the longest-suffering coronavirus patient in the UK after spending 13 months in hospital, apart from Kate and their two children - Darcey, 16 and Billy, 13 (pictured together)
Battle: 'There are some days where he literally cannot do anything and it's like the computer is switched off.
He cannot move, and he's in so much pain as we are manipulating him, trying to get him more mobile so that he doesn't regress'
'I can't thank all those involved in getting him to Mexico enough because without them he wouldn't have the chance of this potentially life-changing treatment.'
She added: 'The plan is to go back for another round of treatment and continue the trial in a way that is financially viable.'
He became the longest-suffering coronavirus patient in the UK after spending 13 months in hospital, apart from Kate and their two children - Darcey, 16 and Billy, 13.
Although Kate insisted that they'd had 'wonderful treatment' from the NHS, which were essential in keeping her husband alive, the foreign trips offer 'potentially life saving treatment'.
As well as the trip, the Smooth Radio presenter has had to spend 'tens of thousands of pounds' adapting the family home in London for Derek, which included the installation of ramps, a downstairs wet room and a makeshift downstairs bedroom.
Due to the severity of his illness and length of time spent in hospital he remains unable to walk and has developed debilitating symptoms.
In summer last year Derek developed sepsis and was again rushed to hospital, where the severe condition nearly killed him.
Speaking about his current condition and caring for him, she told The Sun: 'There are some days where he literally cannot do anything and it's like the computer is switched off.
He cannot move, and he's in so much pain as we are manipulating him, trying to get him more mobile so that he doesn't regress.'
Staying strong: Kate has cared for Derek, both 55, ever since he became unwell with Long Covid in 2020 after becoming gravely ill with the virus at the onset of the pandemic
Care: Kate Garraway revealed there are days when her Covid-stricken husband, Derek Draper, 'cannot do anything', but adds watching him battle illness for almost three years has made her 'fall in love with him all over again
The presenter noted that despite Derek's insistence that they carry on, she says it's 'unbearable' to see him in pain, admitting it makes her 'emotional' just speaking about it.
However, she added: 'It also makes me fall in love with him all over again because of that spirit, that determination to keep going.
Derek is trapped, but he fights on.
We cling on to the good days.'
Reflecting on the ups and downs of caring for her husband, Kate remarked that every day is a 'roller coaster' as Derek's spirit 'fluctuates'.
The journalist added that it is 'heart-breaking' to watch her husband of 18 years unable to move with tears streaming down his face, noting that as 'hard' as it is for them, she 'cannot imagine' how tough it is for Derek.
Meanwhile, Kate opened up on the astronomical costs of Derek's care, adding that it's self-funded and insisting that they've not had any 'special treatment' from the NHS or 'bypassed waiting lists' due to her celebrity status.
Emotional: The journalist added that it is 'heart-breaking' to watch her husband of 18 years unable to move with tears streaming down his face, noting that as 'hard' as it is for them, she 'cannot imagine' how tough it is for Derek
She said: 'Of course it's been tough financially.
As anyone with a loved one who is seriously ill knows, the costs go through the roof in so many ways.
You have to make changes to your home and it affects your ability to work.
I had to take long periods off when Derek was first sick, and of course if affects the overall income for the family as he can no longer work.
'
She went on to say that she's had to close down the business that she and Derek had together, while having to take on assistants to care for Derek while she's doing her TV work.
It comes after Kate shared a message of hope last month after revealing she had had a tricky two days.
Taking to Instagram, the Good Morning Britain presenter admitted her mood had finally lifted after feeling like she was 'trudging uphill on ice' since Sunday.
Kate cares for husband Derek who has been unwell with long COVID since 2020 after becoming gravely ill with the virus at the onset of the coronavirus pandemic.
In her new post, the presenter snapped a photograph of a yellow crocus blooming in her garden and shared positivity after the difficult 48 hours.
Cost: Kate opened up on the astronomical costs of Derek's care, adding that it's self-funded and insisting that they've not had any 'special treatment' from the NHS or 'bypassed waiting lists' due to her celebrity status
Candid: Of course it's been tough financially.
As anyone with a loved one who is seriously ill knows, the costs go through the roof in so many ways.
You have to make changes to your home and it affects your ability to work
She wrote: 'So this is why I love nature & gardening so much - after a tricky 48 hours of feeling like am trudging up hill on ice my first crocus bursts up - the spirit of life & hope in gorgeous yellow form!!'
She added: '@smoothradio #lovenature #hope #love' to her message of hope.
It comes after Kate shared a rare snap of Derek with one of his carers last month.
Taking to Instagram, she posted a tribute to Jake and encouraged her followers to support his music, revealing that he has released a song called okukuseku.
Derek has been unwell with long COVID since 2020 and Jake looked after him when he first came out of hospital.
In the snap, the carer held onto his hand as he looked down at him and grinned.
Kate captioned her post: 'Many of you will remember Jake who cared for Derek when he first came out of hospital in April 21 - from the documentary #caringforderek, so you will know what a wonderful healthcare professional he is.
She continued: 'But have just found out he's also an amazing musician - under the name @sencymiller.x
-
He's just released a song called okuseku (check it out in his bio) - which no surprise is full of love & inspiration to keep going & never give up.
Carer: It came after Kate shared a rare snap of Derek with his carer Jake on Friday and encouraged her followers to support him and his music
Illness: Derek has been unwell with long COVID since 2020 and Jake looked after him when he first came out of hospital (Derek is pictured with Kate in 2019)
'The world of carers never fails to surprise me with their depths of talent , thoughtfulness and motivation #happyfriday all!'
Kate became overwhelmed in January as she confronted former health secretary Matt Hancock over his handling of the pandemic and his decision to go on I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here.
Derek fought for his life after contracting coronavirus in March 2020.
He became the longest-suffering coronavirus patient in the UK after spending 13 months in hospital, and remains very ill.
His broadcaster wife blinked away tears as she told Mr Hancock that millions of Britons still feel 'very raw' about the pandemic and repeated lockdown, declaring: 'At the time it mattered I couldn't visit Derek in hospital, he couldn't see his kids.
'Thousands of other people couldn't see people that they loved because they were following the guidelines.
The rules were very muddled for us out here.
'
Mr Hancock was eventually forced to resign in June 2021 when he was caught flouting his own social distancing guidance by kissing Gina Coladangelo - who he hired with taxpayers' money.
Describing public anger towards him, Kate added of his decision to appear on I'm a Celebrity: 'This gives the impression you still don't get why they are cross.
You still don't get why people are upset.
They want to hold you to more account.'
Mr Hancock replied: 'I get all that.
I really do.
I really feel it.
'
Tears: Kate became overwhelmed in January as she confronted former health secretary Matt Hancock over his handling of the pandemic and his decision to go on I'm a Celebrity ...
Get Me Out of Here
Defending his affair, he said: 'I'm only human.
We all have our frailties and I fell in love', adding: 'But that is not an excuse and that's why I've been open about it.
That's why I asked for forgiveness.'
He repeatedly denied breaking the law.
Ms Garraway asked him if he understood the anger that people felt towards him, especially those separated by loved ones who were in hospital.
She then became tearful and looked up as she spoke about Derek, who has been unwell for approaching three years.
'I suppose the problem is you were the Health Secretary.
Thousands of children couldn't see people that they loved,' she said of visiting restrictions in the NHS for so long under his stewardship.
Study design and setting
The current study was one of the data analyses from the J-RECOVER study.
The J-RECOVER study was a retrospective multicenter observational study conducted in Japan between January and September 2020.
The design, data collection methods, and protocols of the J-RECOVER study have been previously reported in detail22.
The current study was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
The present study was approved by the institutional review boards of Nippon Medical School Musashikosugi Hospital (representative institution, application number:561-2-26), and the requirement for informed consent was waived because of the anonymous nature of the data used.
Treatment protocols were left to each institution.
Patients
The J-RECOVER study included COVID-19 patients admitted to the participating institutions during the study period.
The present study included ventilated patients with severe COVID-19 aged > 17 years and were enrolled in the J-RECOVER study.
Patients were excluded if they had missing data on the number of ICU admissions in 2019 at the institution.
Data collection
The patients’ clinical information was obtained from diagnosis procedure combination (DPC) data and medical records.
The DPC system is comprehensively evaluated for acute inpatient care costs.
Administrative billing data have been created and stored electronically at each institution under a comprehensive payment system based on DPC22,23.
DPC data included sex, date of birth, the primary purpose of care during hospitalization, date of admission, date of discharge, transportation of the patient, route of admission, hospital referral or outpatient department admission, scheduled or emergency care admission, emergency ambulance transport, discharge destination, and the outcomes of discharge.
In addition, other necessary information that was not available from the DPC data was obtained from the institutions’ medical records and personnel.
Measurements and definitions
The primary outcome measure was in-hospital death due to COVID-19 during hospitalization.
Intensive care volume was defined as the number of patients admitted to the ICU between January and December 2019, the year before the COVID-19 pandemic, and it was subdivided into three categories, as per previous studies12,24,25 to evaluate the dose–response relationship.
A cutoff number was defined to determine the number of patients as evenly as possible.
The top third institutions were defined as high-volume centers, the middle third ones as middle-volume centers, and the bottom third ones as low-volume centers.
We used the Charlson comorbidity index to measure underlying disease26.
We used the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score as an index of severity27.
Statistical analysis
Demographic factors, patient characteristics, hospital care, and outcomes were compared among patients treated in high-, middle-, and low-volume centers.
We analyzed trends in discrete variables among the three groups using the Mantel–Haenszel trend test and analyzed continuous variables using the Kruskal–Wallis test.
Regarding missing values, we performed multiple imputations28.
Twenty multiple imputed datasets were generated.
We performed multivariate logistic regression analyses to evaluate the association between ICU case volume and in-hospital death in each dataset, and the estimates were then combined.
Multiple propensity score analysis was used in the multivariate analysis to adjust for measurable prehospital confounding factors29,30.
The propensity score indicates the conditional probability of a specific exposure given a series of measured baseline variables and is a well-established method for reducing confounding effects in observational studies.
The propensity score is used to compare two groups; however, the multiple propensity score was used since this was a comparison of three groups30,31,32.
Moreover, instead of matching and IPTW, which are frequently used in the comparison of two groups using propensity scores, multiple propensity scores were used as covariates in the multivariate analysis to adjust for confounding factors since this is a three-group comparison.
A multiple propensity score is the conditional probability of being classified into three or more specific groups, given a set of observed baseline covariates.
We adapted a multinomial logistic regression model to estimate the multiple propensity score for the present analysis.
The model fell into one of the three groups along with hospital characteristics, including teaching status, number of hospital beds, number of ICU beds, patient demographics (age, sex, and Charlson comorbidity index), and prehospital factors (number of days from symptom onset to hospitalization, number of days from positive polymerase chain reaction test to hospitalization, transfer from another hospital, and SOFA score).
Multivariate logistic regression was then used to analyze the association between ICU volume and in-hospital mortality, adjusting for multiple propensity scores and in-hospital variables such as favipiravir, remdesivir, ICU admission, use of prone position, and use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), while also adjusting for within-hospital clustering using a generalized estimating equation.
All statistical analyses were two-sided, and a level of 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
We analyzed the data using SPSS statistical software version 26 (IBM, New York, USA).
On February 28, 2023, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania’s Department of Labor (PDOL) published regulations concerning three distinct types of job-protected paid leave employers must provide under the Promoting Healthy Families and Workplaces Ordinance (PHFWO).
This is the third iteration of what PDOL labels its “supplemental regulation” of the PHFWO.
Below we briefly recap the history of these three paid leave requirements and highlight notable changes, or clarifications, that the most recent rules provide.
Philadelphia Paid Leaves at a Glance.
In this article we will discuss three distinct paid time off requirements that may apply in Philadelphia: 1) Paid Sick and Safe Time (and how it operates during COVID-19); 2) COVID-19 Paid Sick Leave; and 3) Pool & Healthcare Employee Pay & Benefits Continuation (during public health emergencies like COVID-19).
As enacted originally, the PHFWO required employers to provide paid (or unpaid) leave that covered employees can use for “sick” or “safe” time (PSST) reasons.
In response to COVID-19, Philadelphia made both temporary and permanent changes to the PHFWO.
It enacted three temporary additions that require certain employers to provide additional paid sick leave specifically for COVID-19 related reasons (COVID Paid Sick Leave); the first temporary addition was in effect during the last months of 2020, the second was in effect for most of 2021, and the most recent has been in effect since March 2022 and will remain in effect through December 2023.
Additionally, Philadelphia created permanent additions requiring employers to provide pay continuation to certain healthcare employees but only during public health emergencies (Pool & Healthcare Employee Pay & Benefits Continuation).
On March 16, 2020, PDOL released its first supplemental regulation that solely addressed paid sick and safe time (PSST) standards during COVID-19.
A few months later, on November 13, 2020, the department issued its second supplemental regulation that addressed PSST during COVID, the newly enacted 2020 COVID paid sick leave requirements, along with the also newly enacted healthcare employee pay continuation standards.
Although there was a 2021 COVID paid sick leave requirement, which was different from the 2020 law, PDOL did not issue regulations concerning the 2021 law.
Most recently, on February 28, 2023, PDOL released the third supplemental regulation, which, in addition to rescinding the first and second supplemental regulations, revised the PSST during COVID and healthcare employee pay standards and provided guidance concerning the 2022-23 COVID paid sick leave requirements.
COVID-19 Paid Sick Leave
The regulations clarify covered employer standards, address “jeopardizing others’ health” absences, discuss how employers can use existing policies to comply, and discuss situations when the termination of employment might not relieve employers of their COVID-19 paid sick leave obligations.
Because there we no regulations issued for nearly a year, some employers might have struggled to interpret the law.
For those who looked to prior interpretations of a previous version of the law, many of the provisions in the most recent regulations will look familiar.
Additionally, the latest regulations provide some insight into provisions that did not exist in previous versions of the law.
Covered Employers: The requirements apply to employers with 25 or more employees, but the law does not describe how to calculate business size.
The regulations make clear that employers count covered employees only, i.e., individuals who work for them after March 9, 2022 who work in Philadelphia, normally work in Philadelphia but currently telework from another location due to COVID-19, or work from multiple locations or from mobile locations and 51% or more of their work time is in Philadelphia.
Covered Uses: One reason employees can use COVID-19 paid sick leave is when a public official or public health authority, a health care provider, or an employer determines that the presence of the employee or a family member on the job or in the community would jeopardize others’ health because of the individual’s exposure to COVID-19 or because the individual is exhibiting symptoms that might jeopardize others’ health regardless of whether the individual was diagnosed with or tested positive for COVID-19.
The regulations expand on the scenarios when this reason for leave could apply:
Being subject to a determination by a public official or public health authority with jurisdiction (including a Federal, State, or local quarantine or isolation order), advice given by a Health Care provider, or a direction given by the COVID-19 Employer related to the public health emergency that: is (i) applicable to the type of business or work the employee engages in; or (ii) specific to the employee because the employee’s presence on the job or in the community would jeopardize the health of others because of the employee’s exposure to COVID-19 or because the employee is exhibiting symptoms of COVID-19; either of which [applies] regardless of whether the employee has been diagnosed with COVID-19.
Additionally, the regulations describe an event that would not qualify: “a business closure that is not specifically for the purpose of quarantine or isolation of the individuals working at the business either because of personal exposure or symptoms, or community spread.”
Generous Employer Exception: Under the law, employers can comply via an existing policy, and need not provide additional COVID-19 paid sick leave, if they provided 120 hours or more of paid time off in 2022, regardless of whether that leave was designated as sick leave, if employees could use that leave for the same purposes and under the same conditions the law requires.
The amount drops to 112.5 hours for employers that operate on a 7.5-hour workday and consider 37.5 hours per week to be full time.
Per the regulations, employers must immediately make this 120 (or 112.5) hours of leave available.
The regulations allow borrowing leave if the amount of time the employee accrued during the benefit year would not otherwise reach 120 (or 112.5) hours.
Additionally, the regulations provide that the law’s requirements are met so long as the employer adopts a qualifying policy, regardless of when it was adopted.
Voluntary COVID-19 Paid Leave Policy:
The law also allows employers to meet their obligations via a voluntary policy they adopted in response to COVID-19 (as many did).
Essentially, the law allows employers to offset any leave employees might be entitled to under the law by an amount of leave they provide voluntarily to the employee under such a policy.
The regulations provide, however, that to qualify the policy must not reduce, and cannot have reduced, any other leave benefit balances.
Unused Leave When Employment Ends: Generally, employers need not cash out the balance of any unused COVID-19 paid sick leave when employment ends.
The regulations, however, provide that if an employee’s termination or other involuntary separation coincides with a time when the employee is entitled to use leave, or a time an employer knows the employee would be entitled to use such leave, it would be considered unlawful interference to end employment at that time.
PSST During COVID-19
The regulations last revised in November 2020 are updated to better align with the current COVID-19 climate.
The PHFWO requires employers to provide covered employees with up to 40 hours of sick leave per year.
Whether that leave is paid or unpaid depends on how many covered employees an employer has: 10 or more employees who work in Philadelphia for 40 or more hours per year (paid); 9 or fewer (unpaid).
What’s Gone (Covered Uses).
PDOL has revised examples of what it considers to be preventative medical care – a covered PSST use – to no longer involve absences connected to:
An employee or family member having a greater risk of harm than the general population if they contact COVID-19 (e.g., compromised immune system, self-quarantining due to a healthcare professional’s recommendation).
Self-quarantining for two weeks after returning to the United States after travelling to certain countries.
What’s New (Covered Uses).
In the latest regulations, preventative medical care also includes an employee or family member receiving a COVID-19 test and/or receiving or recovering from a COVID-19 vaccine (including a booster).
What’s Changed (Covered Uses & Documentation).
The prior regulations allowed PSST use if an employee or family member needed to self-quarantine for two weeks for various reasons.
Under the most recent version, employees can still use PSST to self-quarantine, but there no longer is a two-week reference, and the action must be recommended by a healthcare provider pursuant to current recommendations from the Philadelphia Department of Public Health or the U.S. Centers for Disease Control.
Additionally, a “local public health department” has been added to a list of other officials (governor, state health secretary, mayor, local health commissioner) who could require residents of certain Pennsylvania areas not to travel when travel is necessary to report to work, thereby resulting in an employee or family member needing to self-quarantine.
The biggest change, however, concerns rules about when employers can request documentation to substantiate a need for leave, and what counted as “reasonable” documentation.
Under the first and second set of regulations, employers could not require a note from a healthcare professional.
The third set of regulations, however, merely encourages employers not to require such a note.
The most recent rules also, to a degree, revert to the standards in the first set of regulations when it comes to what constitutes “reasonable” documentation:
A public statement from a government official, the Philadelphia Department of Public Health, or the CDC, provided that an employer may require a signed statement from an employee affirming that the conditions described in such public statement apply to the employee or the family member of the employee.
With respect to an employee who is out of the office as a result of the physical illness or health condition involving a fever, dry cough, or shortness of breath or other respiratory illness of such employee or such employee’s family member known to be symptoms of COVID-19, a signed statement from the employee affirming that the relevant conditions apply.
Pool & Healthcare Employee Pay & Benefits Continuation
The regulations clarify the covered employee and employee standards, discuss how much time off employees might receive per absence, address documentation to support absences, and seek to clear up confusion about employers’ ability to comply via existing policies.
This Philadelphia law requires employers that provide healthcare services and use the services of pool or healthcare employees to pay those workers for lost wages and medical expenses if they contract a communicable disease during a pandemic or epidemic affecting Philadelphia such as COVID-19.
Covered Employers: Although it is part of the PHFWO, and, generally, that ordinance applies to all employers, the regulations provide that the pool and healthcare employee pay requirements apply only if an employer has a sufficient number of employees to be subject to the paid sick and safe time requirements: 10 or more covered employees employed for at least 40 weeks in a calendar year in Philadelphia.
The regulations now contain a definition of “healthcare services”:
Any inpatient or outpatient medical or behavioral health, dental, nursing, medical first responder, pharmacological, assisted living residence, intermediate care, adult daycare, long term care facility, acupuncture, audiology, drug and alcohol, hearing aid, chiropractic care, naturopathic care, occupational therapy, physical therapy, athletic training as defined in Second Amendment to the Emergency Regulation Governing the Control and Prevention of COVID-19 Mandating Vaccines For Healthcare Workers and in Higher Education, Healthcare, and Related Settings, optometry, ophthalmology, or speech language pathology services.
Additionally, the regulation provides that, to be covered the employer must engage covered workers at a “healthcare organization,” which is defined as “Any entity, or any portion of a larger entity, that operates with the primary purpose of providing health care services to individuals in an in-person setting.”
The regulations go on to state:
In identifying a portion of an entity that constitutes a Health Care Organization for this purpose, the entity shall identify (1) those employees whose primary purpose is to provide in-person health care services; and (2) any employees who provide direct in-person support for those employees whose primary purpose is to provide in-person health care services.
Any portion of a larger entity that performs remote work and does not perform in-person medical services does not constitute part of a health care organization.
Covered Employees
: The regulations provide that pay and benefit continuation standards apply only to covered pool and healthcare employees who work in person.
Accordingly, the requirements do not apply to employees who telework only.
Additionally, the regulations repeat the ordinance’s requirement that individuals do not qualify unless they are a “covered” employee, i.e., they worked at least 40 hours within the prior 3 months.
Amount of Leave:
The law does not limit how long an employee can be absent.
Instead, it requires employers to reimburse an employee for the number of days the employee is unable to work.
A new regulation states that employees are presumed to be unable to work due to contracting COVID-19 during their isolation period, which equals the number of days the Philadelphia Department of Public Health recommends for isolation due to COVID-19, which can vary due to an individual’s personal circumstances, e.g., if they are immunocompromised.
According to the regulations, the absence could be longer if the employee receives a medical opinion stating that they cannot return to work due to their COVID-19 illness.
Documentation:
The law does not speak to documentation employers can request to substantiate the need for leave, but the regulations have always done so.
The latest regulations expand upon these standards to say what does not qualify as acceptable documentation: A general direction or recommendation to quarantine (conversely, a written isolation recommendation from a qualified healthcare provider remains sufficient).
Additionally, the rules provide an alternative to supplying evidence that an employee contracted COVID-19: a doctor’s note stating that the employee must remain out of work to isolate due to contracting COVID-19.
Using Existing Policies: Some employers were uncertain whether they could comply with these pay continuation requirements by using a pre-existing policy, given that the second set of regulations seemed to suggest they could:
[An employer] that provides paid leave which can be used for the same purposes and under all the same conditions as the [] Healthcare Epidemic Leave Benefit, and provides leave in the same or greater amount as required under the applicable City law, has met the obligations of [the law], but only with respect to the applicable leave benefit or benefits that the Employer[’]s existing leave policy meets or exceeds, without respect to the balance of leave [] available at the time they request a leave benefit[].
The third set of regulations, however, rule out that possibility.
They provide that this pay is “in addition to” other benefits an employer may provide: “Health Care Epidemic Leave is in addition to any other leave benefit Health Care Employers provide and no generous employer provisions apply to this leave benefit.”
Next Steps
Depending on how many of these laws potentially apply to a company, there could be a lot to digest.
Employers should consider what actions they might want (or need) to take – universally or singularly – in response to the regulations.
Though technically called the “third” supplement, online PDOL refers to the supplement as the “final” COVID-19 pandemic paid sick leave regulations, so, even if there is a lot to work through, maybe (fingers crossed)
it might be the last review-and-revise exercise employers with Philadelphia operations need to undertake . . .
at least when it comes to paid leave, in Philadelphia, during a pandemic.
MIAMI — Four members of a Florida family were convicted Wednesday of selling a toxic industrial bleach as a fake Covid-19 cure through their online church.
A federal jury in Miami found Mark Grenon, 65, and his sons, 37-year-old Jonathan, 35-year-old Joseph and 29-year-old Jordan, guilty of conspiring to defraud the United States and deliver misbranded drugs, according to court records.
That charge carries up to five years in prison.
Their sentencing is scheduled for Oct. 6.
The Grenons represented themselves but declined to speak during the two-day trial, the Miami Herald reported.
After the jury delivered its verdict, Joseph Grenon said they would be appealing.
Prosecutors called the Grenons “con men” and “snake-oil salesmen” and said the Bradenton family’s Genesis II Church of Health and Healing sold $1 million worth of their so-called Miracle Mineral Solution.
In videos, it was pitched as a cure for 95% of known diseases, including Covid-19, Alzheimer’s, autism, brain cancer, HIV/AIDS and multiple sclerosis, prosecutors said.
What the Grenons were selling was actually chlorine dioxide, officials said.
When ingested, the solution becomes a bleach that is typically used for such things as treating textiles, industrial water, pulp and paper, according to the Food and Drug Administration.
Authorities said it is the same as drinking bleach and can be fatal.
A Miami federal judge ordered the church to stop selling the substance in 2020, but that was ignored.
Jonathan and Jordan Grenon were arrested in Bradenton, just south of the Tampa Bay area.
Mark and Joseph Grenon fled to Colombia, where they were arrested and extradited back to the U.S.
Besides the fraud convictions, Jonathan and Jordan Grenon were also convicted of violating federal court orders requiring them to stop selling Miracle Mineral Solution in 2020.
U.S. authorities agreed to drop those same contempt charges against Mark and Joseph Grenon as a condition of their extradition from Colombia.
We propose a new simulation framework that sequentially combines agent-based modeling with Monte Carlo simulations for long-term transmission studies.
The overall framework is shown in Fig.
1.
Parallel ABM simulations are used to compute the daily probability of close contact (\(p_{cc}\)) between agents.
We assume daily schedules are independent (from 1 day to the next) for a given agent and break multi-day simulations down into multiple 1-day simulations that can be performed in parallel.
Outputs from this set of ABM simulations are used to generate a contact network represented by a probability matrix assumed to be a function of agent scheduling and facility layout, and NOT a function of whether agents are infected or not.
In other words, this probability matrix would be valid whether there is a pandemic or not since it is computed based on how the facility is used during normal operation.
Figure 1 Flowchart describing the long-term transmission framework used in this work.
Parallel 1-day ABM simulations are performed to estimate the probability that any pair of agents will make contact resulting in a successful transmission.
This probability is then used as an input to a Metropolis Monte Carlo long-term transmission algorithm to study the dynamics of transmission over long-time horizons.
Full size image
The estimated probabilities of having transmissible contacts among any pair of two agents (\(p_{cc}\)) based on the parallel run results are then used in a Monte Carlo Long-Term Transmission Algorithm (MC-LTTA) to study the disease progression.
Within the Monte Carlo simulations, \(p_{cc}\) is used to update the infection status of each facility daily to predict indoor transmission profiles over long-time horizons.
The proposed framework, in one of the best-case scenarios, has led to a speed-up on the order of the number of days of interest compared to an equivalent multi-day simulation.
In the following sections, we describe each step of this workflow in more details.
We start by explaining key elements of the facility-aware agent-based simulations such as how the facility floorplans are managed, how individual schedules are generated, and how indoor navigation is implemented.
This is followed by how the probability of close contact is defined and computed.
Finally, we explain the Monte Carlo simulations and how they are used to compute long-term transmission profiles.
Facility-aware agent-based models
Facility floor plans
In our ABM simulations, we divide the simulation domain into spaces defined by their physical boundaries (i.e., walls), doorways for circulation between spaces, and functionalities (i.e., restroom, meeting rooms, office space, etc.).
The details of the simulation domain are automatically extracted from user-provided floorplan data.
A key challenge addressed in the open-source implementation of this framework is how to incorporate user-provided floorplans.
Floorplans of corporate facilities are managed in various CAD (Computer-Assisted Design) formats and with different levels of details based on the type of facility and the skillset of the people who manage them.
This makes it harder to use this framework in practice.
To facilitate the use of arbitrary floorplans, a simplified SVG format is used to represent the boundaries of each space and all valid doorways.
Each space is assigned a unique identifier and a keyword string corresponding to its expected usage.
Floorplans represented in this simplified format can be automatically processed by the platform.
Agent schedules
In this demonstrative study, personnel schedules are generated automatically based on a predefined list of activities such as cafeteria visit, restroom visit, office work, meetings, etc.
Each activity is defined by a minimum and maximum duration as well as a minimum and maximum number of occurrences during the day.
The type of activity determines where agents must be physically present for the activity to occur.
In case multiple spaces are available for a given type of activity, the location is chosen randomly from the list of supported spaces.
In cases where part of (or the full) the daily schedule of agents is known in advance (e.g., lunch occurs at given timeframe and place), these can be pre-added to agent’s schedules.
Agents are assigned a primary office (or workstation) to which they will go at the beginning of their day and come back to periodically.
The scheduling algorithm also supports policies around meetings such as maximum attendance, maximum room occupancy, etc.
The scheduling routine described here was designed with a research facility in mind, but custom scheduling routines can be designed and added to the open-source code to match the typical usage of any facility of interest.
Schedules are generated separately for each day; however, the same office assignment is kept for runs belonging to the same simulation set.
Indoor navigation
During the ABM simulations, for agents to follow their daily schedules, they must move from space to space according to the location set for each activity.
To be realistic, their motion within the facility cannot be random (in real life, people go from space to space in a well-defined manner).
To address this requirement, we develop an indoor navigation algorithm that computes a suitable route that agents can follow to move within the facility.
At ingestion time, a navigation network is computed for each facility.
This network is then used in combination with each agent’s schedule to compute a suitable itinerary for them at simulation time.
In the default setting, agents pick the best route (typically the shortest path) between a starting point and a destination within the facility.
Specific doors labeled as entrances/exits for the facility are used to define where each agent will enter and exit the facility at the beginning and end off their workday respectively.
Contacts with other agents is tracked both during transit and when they are stationary (e.g., during meetings).
Computing the probability of close contact
According to U.S. Center for Disease Controls (CDC)’s definition as of December 2020, a close contact/transmissible event is defined to be a situation
when “someone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 15 min over a 24-h period, starting from 2 days before illness onset (or, for asymptomatic clients, 2 days prior to positive specimen collection) until the time the patient is isolated” This definition of transmissible contact is adopted in our model.
As agents follow their schedules and associated itineraries within the facility, they naturally encounter one another.
The model can keep track of the transmissible contacts among all pairs of agents that are not separated by physical walls, with detailed notes on location, duration, as well as the specific agents involved.
Through the ABM simulations, we can obtain information on \(D_{ij}\), the cumulative contact duration (in the unit of minutes) between any pair of agents i and j during a specific time period (e.g., 1 day).
In the example to showcase the utility of this model, we assume that the probability of infection during a close contact with an infectious individual is 100%.
As a result, the transmission probability function, \(f(D_{ij})\), can be defined as a delta function (Eq. 1), such that it is equal to 1 when the recorded cumulative contact duration is 15 min or more, and 0 otherwise.
A more realistic expression for \(f(D_{ij})\) could take a different form, such as a parameterized sigmoid (with parameters that account for personal protective equipment, stage of infection, etc.39,42,43,44,43.
The current definition is chosen only for demonstrative purposes.
As newer and more epidemiologic evidence emerges, the function \(f(D_{ij})\) can be updated accordingly.
$$\begin{aligned} f^{CDC}(D_{ij})
= {\left\{ \begin{array}{ll} 1 &{} \text {if }D_{ij} >= 15\\ 0 &{} \text {otherwise} \end{array}\right. }
\end{aligned}$$ (1)
Moreover, the probability that any two agents i and j have a cumulative contact duration of 15 min or more in any given day, \(P(D_{ij} \ge 15)\), is estimated by taking the average of \(f_k^{CDC} (D_{ij})\), the transmission probability function as defined earlier between agents i and j for day k, over a total of N days (Eq. 2).
$$\begin{aligned} P(D_{ij} \ge 15) = \frac{\sum _{k=1}^{k \le N} f_{k}^{CDC}(D_{ij})}{N} \end{aligned}$$ (2)
Long-term transmission model
To increase the computational speed for epidemiologic studies that take into consideration detailed floor layouts of large facilities as well as complex personnel scheduling, we propose the Monte Carlo Long-Term Transmission Algorithm (MC-LTTA), a heuristic long-term transmission modeling framework summarized in Fig. 2 for long-term indoor transmission studies.
A pseudo-code description of the MC-LTTA is provided in the supplemental information.
Figure 2
The different states in the Long-Term Transmission model.
Susceptible individuals are exposed according to a probability of close contacts computed from ABM simulations.
We assume symptomatic individuals are not allowed in the facility and no deaths occur within the population of facility occupants.
Full size image
In the MC-LTTA, for each day, we use the probability of close contact between infectious and susceptible agents as computed from ABM simulations to determine who gets infected.
We assume a 40% probability of asymptomatic infections which falls well within the range of 30% to 45% as reported in the literature44,47,46.
The latency, pre-symptomatic and asymptomatic periods were chosen to be 3, 2 and 10 days, respectively, based on estimates from the literature44,47,50,51,50.
We include a sensitivity analysis around these parameter values in the supplemental material.
Each day, the non-susceptible population is updated by adding all agents that have reached the end of their infection period.
We note that recent data showing that reinfections are possible may invalidate this assumption.
Currently infected individuals are also assumed to be non-susceptible.
We only consider asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic agents as infectious because symptomatic individuals are not allowed in most facilities.
In case such policy does not exist for the facility of interest, a suitable percentage of the full list of infected agents should be used instead.
Potential infections that occur outside of the facility can be taken into account by updating the list of daily infected agents with a number of randomly selected susceptible agents corresponding to the rate of infection in the surrounding community.
Similarly, if the facility enforces a regular testing policy, the list of asymptomatic agents can be updated accordingly as they are tested and found to be infected.
A study from Poland shows that 26 weeks of school closures led to learning loss equal to more than one academic year.
Today is the International Day of Education.
It is a time to celebrate our achievements but also to remember to prioritize education.
It is especially important this year.
Learning loss among the world’s school children has been one of the mass casualties of COVID-19.
Pandemic-induced lockdown measures, which included school closures in most countries, forced 1.4 billion children out of school.
By the end of 2021, school closures resulted in more than 200 lost school days, translating into one-and-a-half academic years.
Being out of school for that long is a one-two punch – children stop learning and forget much of what they have already learned.
As with most crises, the poorest in developing countries feel the most severe impacts of learning loss.
However, even Poland, a high-income country and a human capital success story, has not escaped the impacts of Covid on education and has experienced significant learning loss.
Our new paper, Capturing the Educational and Economic Impacts of School Closures in Poland, studies the effects of school closures on secondary school students' math, science, and reading skills.
We find that learning loss in Poland was equal to more than one academic year, even though school closures lasted less than a school year (26 weeks).
Our study used an assessment of students that reports results on a scale comparable to the OECD's PISA international study.
The results are based on a representative random sample of students in 2021 from grades 10 to 12 and compared to PISA results for a random sample of students from Warsaw between 2003 and 2018.
To properly estimate the effect of school closures and to distinguish it from the effect of the 2016 structural changes—which shortened the period of academic education—we compare the expected and actual achievement of three cohorts of students in secondary schools.
It is assumed students should gain a minimum of 0.1 standard deviation (SD) during one year of education.
But our study finds a significant achievement decline in math, reading and science among 10th grade students.
The actual results are lower by about 0.4 SD in mathematics and almost 0.6 SD in reading and science.
For the 11th grade, mathematics and reading results are lower by approximately 0.3 SD, and in science, by almost 0.4 SD.
For the 12th grade, the smallest gap is around 0.2 SD, which is not statistically different from zero (Figure 1).
Figure 1: The actual and expected achievement of secondary school students in Warsaw
We separated the effects of the pandemic from the 2016 structural reform by comparing achievement changes in the cohorts affected by both events (10th and 11th grade) to changes in the 12th grade affected by the pandemic only.
The learning losses due to the pandemic are 0.3 SD in mathematics and science and are greater than those caused by structural changes (0.2 SD).
In reading, the learning loss is smaller, at 0.2 SD.
This is because students forego learning that would have occurred in a typical year, and they forget what they learned from previous years.
The learning loss consequences can be assessed both by looking at macroeconomic outcomes and individual-level productivity reflected in wages.
Taking a lower bound estimate of the learning loss, the loss of 0.2 SD in achievement would translate into -0.35 percentage points in GDP growth.
A more realistic 0.3 SD learning loss would translate into the effect of -0.52 percentage points on GDP growth.
We also estimated the future earnings losses of today’s students.
After 26 weeks of school closures, the yearly economic loss at the individual level would be $653 (2,927 Polish zloty).
The present value for the 45 years of working life amounts to a loss of $17,000 for each student.
The cumulative loss of lifetime earnings of Polish students amounts to $40 billion, equal to 7.2 percent of 2021 national GDP.
The Polish success story of rapid social and economic progress relied strongly on human capital improvement.
But our findings show that this factor is now weakened because of learning loss.
In mathematics and science, the learning losses are equal to more than a year's worth of schooling, even though schools were closed for only part of an academic year.
In addition, the 2016 reforms had a negative impact on student learning.
These losses are likely to affect the future economic success of the students and the country as a whole.
Schools have reopened, and students are back in class.
The task of learning recovery must commence quickly to both recover some of the losses and accelerate learning.
Accelerated programs must include tailored responses, such as tutoring, for those students that fell behind the most.
Teachers also need to be supported to address the challenge with additional resources, and education systems need to be made more resilient to face future shocks.
A range of menstrual cycle changes after COVID-19 vaccination have been reported, including longer and shorter cycles, missed cycles, heavier and lighter menstrual flow, and intermenstrual spotting, according to a study led by OHSU clincian-scientist Alison Edelman.
(Getty Images)
A new international study finds some people may experience a slight, temporary change in the length of their monthly menstrual cycle following COVID-19 vaccination.
The study, led by Oregon Health & Science University clinician-scientist Alison Edelman, M.D., M.P.H., and published today in the journal BMJ Medicine, builds on prior work from the same research team that first identified an association between COVID-19 vaccines and menstrual cycle changes.
Alison Edelman, M.D., M.P.H. (OHSU)
Their initial research included data from individuals within the Unites States; this recent study expanded to analyze data from an international cohort representing a larger, more geographically diverse population receiving a broader range of vaccine types.
Additionally, researchers were able to look at menstrual cycles after receiving the vaccine to see how long it might take to resolve any changes.
“Menstruation is woefully understudied, which is troubling considering it is a key indicator of fertility and overall health,” said Edelman, the study’s lead investigator and professor of obstetrics and gynecology and division director of Complex Family Planning in the OHSU School of Medicine.
“Our findings with this larger dataset are very consistent with our previous research.
Some individuals experience a slightly longer cycle length with the COVID-19 vaccine, and, for most, it goes back to normal quickly.”
“But more importantly,” she added, “we hope our findings further validate what so many individuals reported experiencing, and allow health care professionals to provide patients with better care and clinical recommendations.”
A range of menstrual cycle changes after COVID-19 vaccination have been reported, including longer and shorter cycles, missed cycles, heavier and lighter menstrual flow, and intermenstrual spotting.
However, clinical trials of vaccines do not collect outcomes related to menstrual cycles, leaving a significant gap in knowledge around these issues, prompting Edelman and team to look more closely at what was being reported by the public.
The study’s data include more than a quarter of a million menstrual cycles recorded by almost 20,000 individuals using the menstrual cycle tracking application Natural Cycles; participants granted researchers permission to use their de-identified data.
The findings were consistent with results found in the U.S. cohort: Individuals who received two doses of a COVID-19 vaccine in a single menstrual cycle saw an average increase in cycle length of 3.7 days compared with the unvaccinated group.
On average, vaccinated people experienced an increase of less than one day in each cycle in which they were vaccinated: a 0.71 day increase after the first dose and a 0.56 day increase after the second dose.
Vaccinated or not, individuals experienced changes in their cycle length, but a larger proportion of vaccinated individuals had an increase in cycle length of more than eight days (13.5%), compared with those who were unvaccinated (5%).
Additionally, changes in cycle length appeared to be similar across the different vaccine types, offering reassurance to those with concerns about newer vaccine technology, Edelman said.
“Changes to routine bodily functions can be alarming, and cause fear and anxiety,” Edelman said.
“We want to emphasize that the menstrual cycle changes at a population level are small and typically resolve in the cycle after vaccination.
Hopefully this knowledge provides clarity about what people can expect after getting vaccinated.”
Individuals who notice prolonged changes in menstruation are encouraged to seek guidance from their clinician.
These findings enable clinicians to better counsel individuals about what to expect with a COVID-19 vaccination and how to make an informed decision about getting vaccinated.
However, researchers say there needs to be further investigation into other changes to menstrual cycles, such as unexpected vaginal bleeding, menstrual flow and pain.
Additionally, the study was not designed to determine why these changes might happen.
Although researchers believe these changes are likely due to temporary, vaccine-related activation of immune response, more research is needed to fully understand the biological mechanism.
This research was funded by The National Institutes of Health’s Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) and the NIH Office of Research on Women's Health (NIH NICHD089957 Supplement).
+++
Reference
Edelman A., et al. Association between menstrual cycle length and COVID-19 Vaccination: a Global Cohort.
British Medical Journal.
2022 (BMJMED2022;0.
doi:10.1136/bmjmed-2022-000297)
Editor’s Note: Tune into CNN this Sunday at 8 p.m. ET for “Restaurant Nation: What’s Changed?”
an episode of “The Whole Story” with Anderson Cooper featuring celebrity chef Bobby Flay, to see how the industry is adapting.
New York CNN —
In March 2020, many US restaurants had to shut their doors during the early days of the Covid pandemic in accordance with local restrictions.
Now, over three years later, the restaurant industry is back.
But the pandemic ushered in some changes that are here to stay.
In the early days of the pandemic, people got used to eating their restaurant food at home.
Today, they’re back in restaurant dining rooms — but still prefer to get meals via the drive-thru, a pickup window or delivery more than they did before.
Meanwhile, restaurants are adapting not only to changing consumer behaviors, but to new industry conditions, like a drop in available workers after many exited the sector in recent years.
Here’s how things have changed.
Dining rooms are shrinking or disappearing
Before the pandemic hit, Esther Choi’s Korean restaurant, Mŏkbar, in Manhattan had counter seats for 20.
Now, those seats are gone.
“After the pandemic is when I decided, we’re just going to do quick service,” Choi told chef Bobby Flay in an episode of “The Whole Story” with Anderson Cooper, on how restaurants are adapting to the new reality.
The episode airs Sunday, August 13 at 8 PM ET on CNN.
That decision has led to rising sales, she said.
Mŏkbar has also continued to sell meals that customers can reheat at home, and delivers meal kits and kimchi nationally.
“I revisited the whole model of the business,” said Choi.
Esther Choi and Masaharu Morimoto at The National Arts Club on October 15, 2022 in New York City.
Roy Rochlin/Getty Images for NYCWFF
“The pandemic taught consumers that you can still have a quality meal, and you don’t have to eat it in the restaurant,” said Joe Pawlak, managing principal with Technomic, a research and consulting firm that focuses on the food industry.
Restaurants across the country are finding that their businesses can flourish outside of the dining room.
Local favorites, like New York City’s Levain bakery and Carbone, a small chain of high-end Italian restaurants, started selling packaged versions of their signature products online and in stores soon after Covid hit, and are still doing so.
And restaurant chains are testing out new, smaller formats that are designed for to-go orders, along with drive-thrus that skip seating altogether.
McDonald’s (MCD), for example, recently teased a smaller format concept called CosMc’s.
In the past, before delivery was so popular, smaller restaurants were essentially “off limits,” said McDonald’s (MCD) CEO Chris Kempczinski during a recent analyst call.
Other fast food chains, like Taco Bell, are experimenting with drive-thrus that have more lanes and large kitchens, and no dining rooms at all.
Delivery is here to stay
When Covid forced many restaurants to close their doors in 2020, many quickly set up delivery services.
Over the past few years, customers developed a taste for the option.
For many restaurants, delivery was a lifeline, but one that came at a high cost.
Delivery providers, like DoorDash (DASH), Uber (UBER) Eats and others, stepped in when demand was sky-high, providing an option to restaurants that had never offered delivery before.
But they charged high commission fees that ate into restaurants’ bottom lines, along with charges for customers.
Some restaurant operators ended up partnering with smaller providers that offered better rates or were more attentive.
Ultimately, major players offered restaurants more options, including tiers of service at lower costs.
Delivery workers wait outside of a restaurant on July 07, 2023 in New York City.
Spencer Platt/Getty Images
Still, delivery isn’t a great deal for most restaurants, said Pawlak.
“I think restaurateurs still will tell you that for them [third-party delivery] … still is a difficult proposition, from a profitability standpoint.”
Some restaurants, he said, will turn off access to delivery on the weekends or during busy times, when they have plenty of sales in dining rooms.
Even chains that were offering delivery prior to the pandemic are getting squeezed by the growing trend.
Domino’s (DPZ), which has made delivery its calling card for years, has found it hard to find delivery drivers amid the crush of new competitors.
For a while, it held off on partnering with outside delivery providers.
But in July, it caved, striking a deal with Uber Eats and Postmates to appear on their platform but not use their drivers.
Whether restaurants like it or not, “delivery certainly is here to stay,” said Pawlak.
But “I think we’re starting to see a slowdown in delivery,” he noted, because for customers “the price has gotten astronomical.”
With prices so high, and customers already pulling back on spending, some may start turning to drive-thru or to-go options, leaving delivery for special occasions.
Still, Doordash reported in August that in its second quarter, overall orders grew.
Too many jobs, too few workers
Early in the pandemic, many restaurant workers got laid off.
Others, fearing for their own or their loved ones’ health — or simply burnt out by stressful conditions — looked for other jobs and stuck with them.
Now, over three years since the pandemic hit the US, some restaurant jobs remain unfilled.
“The size of the restaurant workforce remains below pre-pandemic levels,” the National Restaurant Association said in August, following the July jobs report.
“As of July 2023, eating and drinking places were 64,000 jobs — or 0.5% — below their February 2020 employment peak.”
Some restaurant operators have reconsidered their business models during Covid, with the goal of offering workers more benefits, consistency and transparency.
Israel and Bonnie Morales of Kachka in Portland, Oregon on September 24, 2020.
Leah Nash/The Washington Post/Getty Images
Bonnie and Israel Morales, for example, eliminated tips in their restaurant, Kachka, in Portland.
They instituted a $25 minimum wage and started charging a mandatory service fee of 22% to offset the costs, they told Flay during Sunday’s episode of “The Whole Story.”
Donna, a restaurant and bar in New York City, closed during the pandemic and reopened as a worker-owned cooperative.
Restaurant chains have also raised wages a bit in a bid to attract and retain workers.
But many of these have at the same time vehemently opposed proposed legislation that could raise the minimum wage for fast food workers.
The industry overall has “to do a better job of showing people… that this is a good career,” Pawlak said.
“I think we have to start moving up in terms of paying people better.”
This epidemic presented unique challenges that the Uganda government had not faced before.
Mubende district — the epicenter of the epidemic — is traversed by a major highway that connects Uganda to the neighboring countries of Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Rwanda, Tanzania, and Kenya.
Mubende district is also only 150 kilometers (a 3-hour drive) from the capital city, Kampala (population 3.8 million), which eventually experienced spread of the virus.
This connectivity required unique approaches to stop transmission in the densely populated urban and peri-urban areas, and to avert international spread through the highly active air and ground transportation networks.
The epicenter also has mining activities and diverse communities from neighboring countries, which presented cultural challenges for risk communication and community engagement, and further increased the potential for regional spread.
These factors led the WHO to classify the threat as category 3, warning that the epidemic was likely to spread across international borders7.
The successful control of the epidemic within 113 days, without locking down the capital city, was guided by two factors: lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic, and recent successes in responding to EVD epidemics in DRC.
The global response to the COVID-19 pandemic exposed the weakness of overreliance on multilateral responses to global threats, because every country — high- and low-income alike — was forced to rapidly develop individual pandemic-response structures.
As pointed out by WHO and the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the support given to global public-health agencies such as WHO and to low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) diminished, resulting in inequities in the supply of key biomedical items such as personal protective equipment and medical countermeasures required for the pandemic response8,9.
The pandemic showed that regional collaboration needs to be created, supported, and sustained in order to assure emergency capacity for the distribution of supplies, as well as collaborative development of expertise, funding, and infrastructure for an effective regional response.
A health-care worker prepares a dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech Covid-19 vaccine at a vaccination clinic in the Peabody Institute Library in Peabody, Massachusetts, Jan. 26, 2022.
The Biden administration on Thursday announced a program to provide free Covid vaccines to uninsured Americans through December 2024 after the federal government's supply of shots runs out this fall.
Those free shots, which the government is purchasing at a discount, will be available to the uninsured at pharmacies and 64 state and local health departments.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services also is hoping vaccine makers will donate shots to pharmacies as part of the program.
There are between 25 million and 30 million uninsured adults in the United States and other Americans whose insurance will not cover free Covid products this fall, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Currently, the government has an inventory of vaccines purchased from three manufacturers, Pfizer , Moderna and Novavax , and those companies do not sell the shots to health-care providers.
In the fall, the companies will begin selling shots directly to health providers and the government's supply is expected to run out.
The HHS in April first announced the Bridge Access Program, but had not said when the program would stop providing shots for free to the uninsured until Thursday.
The program reflects a broad shift on the Covid-19 pandemic's effects worldwide.
As Covid cases and deaths have dropped to new lows, governments have rolled back stringent health mandates such as masking and social distancing, and the rate at which people get Covid vaccines has slowed to a crawl over the past year.
Earlier this year, the World Health Organization declared an end to the global Covid public health emergency.
In May, the HHS declared an end to the emergency in the United States.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has declared the end of the global emergency caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Although COVID-19 remains a danger for many, especially with the possibility of new variants, experts are urging that we move forward to prepare for the next pandemic.
The pandemic caused significant suffering.
The WHO estimates that around 6.9 million people died, although the true death toll is likely much higher.
Added to that is the loss and pain experienced by many around the world.
But the pandemic also created the circumstances for a type of global, national and local solidarity that has rarely been seen before.
In Canada, we saw this unique solidarity in the homegrown “caremongering” movement, where volunteers organized online to offer a helping hand to neighbours and strangers.
During the height of the pandemic, there were at least 191 caremongering groups in Canada.
The movement showcased the goodwill of “kind Canadians” and was praised worldwide.
Caremongering
A study led by researchers at McMaster University on caremongering Facebook groups found that the majority of posts were to request or offer materials like personal protective equipment, food and clothes or services like picking up groceries and prescriptions.
There was also a lot of information-sharing about COVID-19, community updates, inspiration and advice.
News reports covered these heartwarming stories from coast to coast.
From Halifax to Hamilton and Kamloops, many caremongers called this help “lifesaving.”
This was especially the case for vulnerable populations such as the elderly, people with disabilities and immunocompromized individuals.
Pandemic unveiled systemic issues
It seems that during those early days, people forgot about their differences and banded together in unity to feel stronger against the common enemy of COVID-19.
But crises and disasters can also “lift veils.”
They can be transformative or confirmatory, generate new ways of thinking or reinforce prevailing structures of power.
Disasters like the pandemic provide an opportunity to examine the exception in order to understand the rule and to expose the unequal social structures that are often hidden in everyday life.
A University of Guelph study found that in 2020, as the reality of the pandemic set in, discussions in caremonger groups turned towards difficult topics of social justice, inequality and colonization.
One group organizer who took part in the study shared that she felt COVID-19 unveiled the challenges faced by marginalized people.
“[It] pulled a mask off of this but once COVID goes away, these problems do not go away … so right now is the time that we have to keep that mask off so that we make sure that whatever it looks like on the other side of COVID, there is more equity, there’s more justice, there’s more support and nurturing and recognition that we have been hiding people away and ignoring problems for far too long.”
For example, the inequitable rollout of vaccines unveiled how governments have historically overlooked lower-income and racialized communities.
It galvanized doctors, public health experts and community advocates to demand better from the government.
Many people saw the injustice in how the most affected neighbourhoods, where people were doing essential work in grocery stores, factories, delivery trucks and hospitals, had the lowest vaccination rates while high-income neighbourhoods filled with white collar and remote workers had the highest vaccination rates.
A more equitable post-pandemic world
As the global emergency ends, we need to ask ourselves how a post-pandemic world could be more equitable, just and nurturing.
To begin, we can bring the energy of caring for others to our politics.
The pandemic allowed people to connect with strangers in their neighbourhoods and country through the development of community good will across different geographies.
This is what political scientist Benedict Anderson called socially-constructed “imagined communities.”
During the pandemic, a light was shone on the needs of those rarely prioritized in politics such as seniors in long-term care, children, low-income households and immunocompromised individuals.
Politics is about who gets what, where and how and we saw that in action throughout the pandemic.
We can apply our newly gained political awareness in the upcoming elections in Toronto and Alberta and aim to achieve a politics that strives for a more equitable, just and nurturing approach to the distribution of resources through evidence-based policies.
Second, the pandemic provided citizens with the time and motivation to think intentionally about life.
Some have argued that the pandemic is an opportunity to “rethink humanity’s future” with a focus on reimagining the way we want to live going forward.
Indeed, many people have adapted healthier behaviours and more sustainable lifestyles.
In the U.K., 85 per cent of consumers reported adopting at least one sustainable lifestyle change during the pandemic.
Pandemic travel restrictions also produced some positive environmental effects around the world.
Air travel decreased significantly and raised people’s thresholds for what justifies their carbon emissions.
Others have become more ethical consumers as part of the shop local movement.
More than 80 per cent of Canadians reported a desire to support local small businesses during the 2021 holiday season.
All this symbolizes a shift in thinking.
As we reflect on the last three years, let us seize the opportunity to use the experience to create a more equitable, just and nurturing post-pandemic world.
COVID-19 patients placed on ventilators can take a long time to regain consciousness.
New research from Weill Cornell Medicine, NewYork-Presbyterian, MIT, and Massachusetts General Hospital is now illustrating that these delays may serve a purpose: protecting the brain from oxygen deprivation.
The existence of such a brain-preserving state could explain why some patients wake up days or even weeks after they stop receiving ventilation, and it suggests that physicians should take these lengthy recovery times into account when determining a patient’s prognosis.
In a study published Nov. 7 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, the investigators connect the pattern seen among those who have survived severe COVID-19 with similar delays known to occur in a small fraction of cardiac arrest patients.
“The delayed recoveries in COVID-19 patients are very much like the rare cases we’ve documented in previous research.
In this new paper, we describe a mechanism to explain what we’re seeing in both types of patients,” said study co-senior author Dr. Nicholas D. Schiff, the Jerold B. Katz Professor of Neurology and Neuroscience in the Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute and co-director of the Consortium for the Advanced Study of Brain Injury (CASBI) at Weill Cornell Medicine.
He found evidence for this explanation — that patients’ brains are protecting themselves — in animals, most notably painted turtles, that can tolerate extended periods without oxygen.
More than a decade ago, Dr. Schiff and his colleagues first observed these delays among comatose cardiac arrest patients who received cooling therapy to reduce brain damage caused by a loss of blood flow.
In one such case, a 71-year-old patient took 37 days to awaken, before ultimately making a near-complete recovery.
During the pandemic, Dr. Schiff, who is also a neurologist at NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center, performed neurology consultations for COVID-19 patients, and he soon began seeing similar, delayed awakenings occurring when patients were taken off ventilators and stopped receiving the sedatives given to them to reduce their movement.
In a separate analysis of a large cohort of Covid-19 patients from Weill Cornell Medicine and two other major U.S. medical centers, Dr. Schiff and his colleagues, including co-author of the current paper, Dr. Emery N. Brown, professor of anesthesia at Harvard Medical School, Edward Hood Taplin Professor of Medical Engineering and Computational Neuroscience in The Picower Institute for Learning and Memory at MIT and an anesthesiologist at Massachusetts General Hospital, found that a quarter of patients who survived ventilation took 10 days or longer to recover consciousness.
The more oxygen deprivation they suffered while on the ventilator, the longer that delay.
In the prior study of cardiac patients, the researchers recorded a distinctive pattern in brain activity, one also seen in patients under deep anesthesia.
(Recordings from COVID-19 patients are extremely limited.)
Dr. Schiff read that a similar pattern had been seen in the brains of painted turtles, which can withstand up to five months without oxygen under ice in the winter.
To do so, they activate the same inhibitory system within the brain targeted by anesthetics given to human cardiac and COVID-19 patients but in novel ways developed by evolutionary specializations.
Dr. Schiff and Dr. Brown propose that, by chance, the same protective response emerges in the patients.
“It is our theory that oxygen deprivation as well as practices in the ICU, including commonly used anesthetics, expose elements of strategies that animals use to survive in extreme conditions,” Dr. Schiff said.
"These observations may offer new insights into the mechanisms of how certain anesthetics produce unconsciousness and new approaches for ICU sedation and for fostering recovery from disorders of consciousness," Dr. Brown added.
When patients fail to regain consciousness for an extended time, physicians may recommend withdrawing life-supporting care.
This threshold is typically set at 14 days or less for cardiac patients, while no such guidelines exist for COVID-19.
In light of this new research, however, so long as they lack brain injuries, physicians should avoid making negative projections about these patients’ potential to recover, note the researchers.
In summary Many of the people who lost Medi-Cal are likely still eligible for health care coverage if they can get their paperwork to county offices in the next 90 days.
About 225,0000 Californians lost their free or low-cost health coverage as of July 1, in the first round of a Medi-Cal renewal process that had been suspended since early in the COVID-19 pandemic.
That’s approximately 21% of the over 1 million people who were due to reapply for coverage in June, according to preliminary numbers released by state health officials on Thursday.
Medi-Cal, the state’s health insurance program for low-income people, typically reviews enrollees’ eligibility every year.
The state paused that process during the pandemic at the orders of the federal government, but resumed in the spring.
Less than 3% of the people who lost coverage no longer qualify for Medi-Cal because their household income now exceeds the program’s limits.
That means the majority of people were kicked off because they didn’t return a renewal packet and county Medi-Cal offices couldn’t verify an enrollee’s income.
State health officials said they are trying to reach enrollees in multiple ways — email, mail and texts.
David Kane, a senior attorney with the Western Center on Law and Poverty, said it is concerning that tens of thousands of people could be without insurance even though they are eligible.
They may have failed to respond for a number of reasons, such as not receiving the packet or not getting the packet in their language.
“I don’t think today’s preliminary numbers mean we can all sit back and think things are OK,” Kane said.
“These disenrollments are not inevitable.
The state, counties, advocates, and community groups together have the power to help more people keep their Medi-Cal.”
California will have to review eligibility for almost 16 million people over the next 12 months.
June 30 was the deadline for the first group of enrollees.
State health officials have previously estimated that between 2 million to 3 million people could lose their Medi-Cal coverage by next June through the reviews.
Californians who were dropped from Medi-Cal on July 1 have 90 days to reinstate coverage if they believe they are still eligible but didn’t return the necessary paperwork.
After that period, state officials estimate this first month’s disenrollment rate will be closer to 17%.
That rate is “equal to or better” than disenrollment rates recorded prior to the pandemic, said Jacey Cooper, the state’s Medicaid director.
Millions could lose health care
During the pandemic freeze, California’s Medi-Cal roll ballooned to cover close to 15.8 million residents — about 40% of the state’s population.
California is the latest state to release preliminary numbers.
Across 33 other states and D.C, more than 3 million people have already been kicked off Medicaid (Medi-Cal is California’s version of Medicaid), according to a Kaiser Family Foundation tracker.
The foundation estimates that could grow to as many as 24 million nationwide over the next year.
According to the foundation, 74% of disenrollments happened because states could not verify a person’s eligibility — and not necessarily because they no longer qualified for free or low-cost health care.
California state officials said some people will be automatically re-enrolled if they can verify income information via government databases, but most people will have to fill out and mail back a renewal packet.
Why some eligible Californians could lose Medi-Cal
Health advocates have said they worry many eligible people will fall through the cracks or get caught in administrative hurdles and unnecessarily become uninsured.
Eddie Hu in Los Angeles helped this 65-year-old father renew his Medi-Cal coverage.
The process went smoothly largely because Hu works for Asian Resources, a community organization that provides some health insurance enrollment aid, and was familiar with the process.
But he noted that his dad’s paperwork was sent to him in English, even though he had previously indicated he needs his paperwork in Chinese.
“We had to fill out seven to eight pages all in English,” Hu said.
“If I’m not here, he would have to look for help somewhere else.”
And getting outside aid from a county office or a clinic, for example, could mean long waits on the phone or multiple in-person appointments to get all the needed paperwork straightened out, Hu said.
To qualify for Medi-Cal, people can earn up to 138% of the federal poverty level — that’s $20,121 a year for an individual or $41,400 for a family of four.
Some Californians, such as pregnant women and people with disabilities, may qualify with slightly higher incomes.
State officials have said that they are working to automatically transition people who were kicked off Medi-Cal to sign up for a health plan through Covered California, the state’s health insurance marketplace.
Most people who buy from the marketplace receive generous subsidies, and some people don’t have a premium cost at all.
Nearly half of the people enrolled in coverage through Covered California pay less than $50 a month, according to the agency.
Supported by the California Health Care Foundation (CHCF), which works to ensure that people have access to the care they need, when they need it, at a price they can afford.
Visit www.chcf.org to learn more.
Associate Professor Guy German, left, and Distinguished Professor Kaiming Ye, chair of the Department of Biomedical Engineering, have new research that offers provable standards for ultraviolet disinfection.
Image Credit: Jonathan Cohen.
New study proves correct dosage for ultraviolet disinfection against COVID Research lays the foundation for health standards about what offers true UV sterilization
When the COVID-19 pandemic emerged in early 2020, ultraviolet radiation became one of the go-to methods for preventing the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, along with facemasks, hand sanitizer and social distancing.
The problem: There was little research showing what UV dosage kills the virus.
What wavelength?
How long?
And could UV systems be installed in public places such as airports, bus stations and stores without causing long-term damage to people?
In a newly published study, researchers from Binghamton University’s Thomas J. Watson College of Engineering and Applied Science answer many of those questions and lay the foundation for health standards about what offers true disinfection.
The paper, titled “Systematic evaluating and modeling of SARS-CoV-2 UVC disinfection” and published in Scientific Reports, is written by Distinguished Professor Kaiming Ye, chair of the Department of Biomedical Engineering; BME Associate Professor Guy German and BME Professor Sha Jin, along with PhD student Sebastian Freeman; Zachary Lipsky, PhD ’21; and Karen Kibler from the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University.
The idea for the research came when shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE) early in the pandemic inspired Ye, German and Binghamton University staff members to quickly build UV disinfection stations for hospitals in the region, so that N-95 masks and other items could be reused.
Distinguished Professor Kaiming Ye, chair of the Department of Biomedical Engineering, and Associate Professor Guy German developed a machine to disinfect personal protective equipment such as facemasks.
Image Credit: Jonathan Cohen.
Distinguished Professor Kaiming Ye, chair of the Department of Biomedical Engineering, and Associate Professor Guy German developed a machine to disinfect personal protective equipment such as facemasks.
Image Credit: Jonathan Cohen. ×
“There is a lot of research on UV dosages in the scientific literature, but not in a systematic way,” Ye said.
“When we started this project, there were really no data or experiments that had been done because the pandemic happened very quickly.”
Ye and German received funding to pursue their questions through a mid-2020 grant for $182,728 from the National Science Foundation.
The Binghamton team added a retrovirus similar to SARS-CoV-2 to three different media (a cell-culture medium, water and an artificial re-creation of human saliva) and exposed them to three different wavelengths in the UVC range.
UVC kills viruses and other microorganisms by damaging their DNA and RNA, which are the bioorganic building blocks for life.
“The disinfection efficiencies are greatly influenced by the media where the virus is,” Ye said.
“We used the same dosage, the same light intensity and the same wavelengths when the virus was suspended in saliva, water and a cell-culture medium, but the efficiency was completely different.”
The best results during the study came from a range of 260 to 280 nanometers, which is commonly used in LED UVC lights.
Wavelengths below 260 nanometers can be deployed only in unoccupied spaces because they can damage human skin and eyes.
“There are so many companies that are purporting to say their products completely disinfect and are completely safe,” German said.
“However, in this article, we demonstrate that both far (222 nanometers) and regular UVC light (254 nanometers) degrade the mechanical integrity of the stratum corneum, the skin’s top layer, causing higher likelihood of cracking.
That means nasty bacteria and other microorganisms can get into and potentially infect your skin.”
Based on the results of the research, Ye and German have designed an LED light disinfection system that should cause less damage to human skin.
They are doing additional testing before applying for a patent on it.
“We are waiting for the data, and then we are pretty much finished.
We know it will work,” Ye said.
Also, the Binghamton team found that two amino acids (L-tryptophan and L-tyrosine) and a vitamin (niacinamide) are strong absorbers of UVC, and that discovery could lead to lotions that would block exposure and prevent skin damage if UVC disinfection becomes more prevalent in public spaces.
Ye believes the most important part of this research is that it offers a scientific basis for standardizing and regulating claims from manufacturers of UV disinfectant devices.
“The system we came up with can become the model for anybody who wants to standardize the dosage,” he said.
“This is how to determine the eradication of SARS-CoV-2 using UVC — maybe also SARS-CoV-3, SARS-CoV-4, SARS-CoV-5.
We hope we never get there, but we need to be prepared.”
Four-fold variation in standardised COVID-19 death rates across US states between January 2020 and July 2022 – with death rates lowest in Hawaii, New Hampshire, and Maine and highest in Arizona, Washington, DC, and New Mexico.
COVID-19 exploited and compounded existing local racial inequities, health disparities, and partisan politics, resulting in a disproportionate burden of COVID-19 on communities of colour and in states that voted heavily Republican in the 2020 presidential election .
.
No link otherwise between state governors' political affiliation and COVID-19 death rates.
States that imposed more vaccine and mask mandates experienced lower infection rates but tended to have worse employment rates and student test results, yet did not fare worse economically.
Authors call for clear, transparent, and timely communication of findings to rebuild public trust in public health and the future pandemic response.
Video News Release
The most comprehensive state-by-state analysis of the impacts of COVID-19 across the USA, published today in The Lancet, reveals the underlying reasons why the pandemic has played out in vastly different ways across the country.
Although the USA has the largest economy, spends more on health care than any other country, and was ranked as best prepared for a pandemic in the Global Health Security Index in 2020 (data collected prior to the pandemic), it maintains the highest number of recorded COVID-19 deaths and one of the highest per capita fatality rates from COVID-19 globally.
But the pandemic did not impact US states equally.
The new analysis finds that between January 1, 2020, and July 31, 2022, cumulative COVID-19 death rates varied widely across the USA, with Hawaii and New Hampshire having the lowest standardised rates (adjusted for age and comorbidities; 147 and 215 deaths per 100,000, respectively) and Arizona and Washington, DC having the highest (581 and 526 deaths per 100,000, respectively).
"The tragic human toll of the COVID-19 pandemic in the USA challenged conventional assessments of pandemic preparedness and exposed existing vulnerabilities in our societal fabric that were not identical across states," says co-lead author Emma Castro, a researcher at the Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME), USA.
"Even after accounting for age and underlying illnesses, we observed a nearly four-fold difference in COVID-19 death rates across states, suggesting that the country as a whole could have performed much better.
Examining how specific states fared and identifying commonalities of states that performed well offers important insights about how we can and must respond better to this and future pandemic threats."
[1]
The researchers stress that states with the lowest standardised COVID-19 death rates came from different geographies and partisan influence.
And the same is true for the states with the highest standardised COVID-19 death rates.
The study is the first time researchers have comprehensively examined the driving forces behind wide variations in SARS-CoV-2 infections and COVID-19 deaths across all states over a lengthy period and adjusted for factors outside policymakers' immediate control (e.g., age, population density, key comorbidities).
Using state-level data from public databases
[3], researchers analysed government policy responses and population behaviours (e.g., mask use, vaccination, mobility) in all 50 US states and Washington, DC, from January 1, 2020, to July 31, 2022, to assess states' efforts in mitigating the impact of SARS-CoV-2 infections and COVID-19 deaths, and whether better COVID-19-related outcomes offset economic, educational, and employment losses.
Results of this analysis were used to answer five-key policy questions that have emerged during the pandemic around wide state-by-state variations in COVID-outcomes: 1) the role of social, racial, and economic inequities; 2) whether states with greater health care and public health capacity performed better; 3) the influence of politics on the results; 4) whether states that imposed more policy mandates and sustained them longer did better; and 5) whether there were trade-offs between a state having fewer cumulative SARS-CoV-2 infections and total COVID-19 deaths and better economic and educational outcomes.
COVID-19 has magnified existing social, economic, and racial inequities
The analyses found that US states with higher poverty, lower rates of educational attainment, less access to quality health care, and lower levels of interpersonal trust (trust in others) experienced disproportionately higher rates of SARS-CoV-2 infections and COVID-19 deaths.
This set of factors was found to exist in states where COVID-19 has done the greatest damage—those with the highest populations of people who identify as Black and where high percentages of people voted for the Republican presidential candidate in the 2020 election, such as Texas, Mississippi, Georgia, and Alabama.
"What is clear from our study is that COVID-19 exploited and compounded existing local racial inequities, health disparities, and partisan politics to create a syndemic—a combination of local factors that interact, increasing the burden of disease from this pandemic and the likelihood of poor outcomes," says co-lead author Thomas J. Bollyky, Director of the Council on Foreign Relations' Global Health Program in the USA.
"This combination of racial disparities and politics explains a large part of why the USA particularly struggled in the pandemic."
[1]
In addition, the study found that while states with greater access to quality health care tended to perform better, with, on average, fewer COVID-19 deaths and SARS-CoV-2 infections, higher state public health spending and more public health personnel per capita were not associated with better health outcomes, at the state level.
States' political orientation played a nuanced role in COVID-19 outcomes
The analysis suggests that partisan politics played a nuanced role in state-level COVID-19 outcomes.
No association was found between the political affiliation of the state governor and death rates from COVID-19.
Five of the 10 states with the lowest standardised death rates—Vermont, New Hampshire, Maryland, Ohio, and Nebraska—were Republican-led, with the other five best-performing states led by Democrat governors.
However, a key predictor of infections and total COVID-19 deaths was the share of the state that voted Republican in the 2020 presidential election.
Political partisanship also influenced local decisions about how Americans use the health system.
In states that voted heavily Democratic in the 2020 presidential election, vaccine coverage was associated with stronger health systems (e.g., more health workers and physicians, fewer uninsured).
In heavily Republican states, however, the analysis found no link between health system factors and the adoption of protective behaviours, such as vaccination.
"Importantly, our results suggest that the more robust a health system, the better a state performed in the pandemic, but only in states where the public was willing to make use of health care services for vaccination or to get early treatment for their conditions," explains senior author Dr Joseph Dieleman from IHME.
"Moving forward, it is critical for public health officials, as well as other leaders – elected officials, community organisers, leaders of religious institutions – to work together to ensure the key messages about accessing care and preventative measures reach all populations and is more broadly adopted."
[1]
Trade-offs between public health restrictions, jobs, and student test results
States that imposed more protective mandates, such as those encouraging mask use, mobility restrictions, and higher vaccination rates, and maintained them for longer, experienced lower infection rates.
Only vaccine coverage had a strong association with state variation in COVID-19 death rates.
"Our estimates suggest that use of mandates and gathering restrictions was statistically associated with lower infection rates, but not death rates," says Dieleman.
"Many other factors impact death rates.
Ultimately our public health policies seem capable of preventing transmission, but other societal factors like poverty, education attainment, and access to high-quality healthcare might have muddled the response and led to death rates being highest in some states that didn't have tremendously high infection rates."
[1]
New estimates suggest that if these associations are causal, then the state with the lowest use of protective mandates on masks and social distancing (Oklahoma) had the same policy response as the state with the most use (California), it would have experienced almost a third (32%) fewer infections.
Similarly, estimates suggest that if the state with the lowest vaccine coverage (Alabama) adopted the vaccine uptake of the state with the highest vaccination coverage (Vermont), cumulative infections (30%) and deaths (35%) would have been cut by around a third.
To determine each state's economic situation, the researchers looked at employment figures and state gross domestic product (GDP output).
They found that Hawaii, Washington DC, and New York had the largest reduction in employment while Wyoming, Hawaii, and New Mexico tended to fare worse economically.
Despite wide variation across the USA in the relative decline in local GDP, employment rate, and math and reading test scores, the study found no evidence of a trade-off between a state having a relatively strong economy or a good health performance in the pandemic.
Specifically, the analysis found no links between GDP and most health mandates, lower infections, or fewer total deaths in the pandemic.
"Our results suggest that the local economy was neither hindered nor helped by the differences in the policy mandates that states adopted to reduce COVID-19 deaths or slow the spread of SARS-CoV-2 infections," says Bollyky.
"For example, maintaining mask mandates for longer did not translate, on average, into a state experiencing a greater reduction in GDP than its less restrictive neighbours.
"
Dieleman adds "Most states had reductions in economic activity during the pandemic, especially in 2020, but those reductions were not systematically related to state policy mandates or COVID infection and fatality rates.
When looking at the pandemic as a whole, many things, including federal policy responses, were put in place to prevent the economy from doing any worse than it did.
And the sectors that did do the worst, like transportation and leisure, make up a relatively small part of the economy, even though they make a disproportionately large fraction of the workforce.
"
But there was a trade-off with jobs.
Mandated restaurant closures and increased mask use were associated with larger falls in employment rates.
Likewise, less mask use, more infections, and greater COVID-19 deaths were closely tied with higher employment.
The study estimates that, on average, there were 1,574 additional infections per 10,000 population with each percentage point increase in the employment rate.
This suggests that job losses may have been less severe in states where the population was more willing to risk contracting COVID-19 and participate in out-of-home activities like retail shopping and dining out.
One of the most controversial topics related to the COVID-19 pandemic, state-level school closures, did not appear to play a role in lower student test results across most US states.
Instead, the study suggests that declines in fourth-grade maths scores in the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) exam were linked with several policy mandates, including increased mask use and vaccine mandates for state and school employees.
"It's possible that in states that were more cautious about COVID-19 transmission, more parents elected for remote schooling.
Another possibility is that mask and vaccine mandates impacted school attendance and closures in ways our study was not designed to measure," explains Bollyky.
"Our immediate priority should be helping support the lowest-achieving students catch up and addressing US educational achievement gaps, which have widened substantially over this pandemic.
In future health crises, it is critical to developing job retention schemes and better educational policies that can mitigate these societal trade-offs."
[1]
Rebuilding public trust with clear, transparent, and timely communication
The authors stress that understanding the contexts in which infections and deaths were disproportionately clustered in this pandemic will be crucial in the design and targeting of clinical and policy interventions to ensure better health outcomes in future crises.
For instance, policies such as paid family and sick leave and expanded Medicaid and insurance coverage would help people on lower incomes get vaccinated and obtain effective treatment.
And states investing in community-based organisations, such as local clinics or faith-based institutions, to continue to engage in ongoing public health promotion, build relationships with constituents, and encourage vaccine uptake generally among partisan and marginalised groups.
"To rebuild trust in public health and the future pandemic response, we must improve transparency around the political contexts and social, economic, and racial inequities that have magnified US struggles in this crisis, and to be honest in identifying where the economic and educational trade-offs may have been too great to justify the protective measures adopted," says Bollyky.
"Our results suggest that those US states that mitigated those structural inequalities, deployed science-based measures, and mobilised the solidarity that exists in American society were able to match the best-performing nations globally."
[1]
NOTES TO EDITORS
This study was funded by Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, J Stanton, T Gillespie, J and E Nordstrom, and Bloomberg Philanthropies.
A full list of authors and their institutions is available in the paper.
The labels have been added to this press release as part of a project run by the Academy of Medical Sciences seeking to improve the communication of evidence.
For more information, please see: http://www.sciencemediacentre.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/AMS-press-release-labelling-system-GUIDANCE.pdf if you have any questions or feedback, please contact The Lancet press office [email protected]
[1] Quotes direct from authors and cannot be found in text of paper.
[2] US state data were extracted from public databases, including COVID-19 infection and mortality estimates from the IHME COVID-19 database; Bureau of Economic Analysis data on state gross domestic product (GDP); Federal Reserve Economic Data on employment rates; National Center for Education Statistics data on student standardised test scores; National Center for Education Statistics data on student standardised test scores; and US Census Bureau for state race/ethnicity data.
For interviews with Article authors, please email the IHME media team at [email protected].
Moderna was criticized for considering a price hike for its shot.
Moderna says its COVID vaccine will remain free for all consumers, even those uninsured
Moderna will keep its COVID vaccine on the market at no cost to consumers, even after the federal government stops paying for it, the company announced Wednesday.
"Everyone in the United States will have access to Moderna's COVID-19 vaccine regardless of their ability to pay," the company said in a statement.
Last month, the vaccine maker was slammed for reportedly considering a dramatic price increase for the shot, which it had developed with the help of the federal government.
The proposal was also bad timing: The Biden administration was moving toward ending its designation of a public health emergencyon May 11, which meant that federal funding for vaccines would soon dry up and uninsured Americans would have to pay out of pocket for their boosters.
Moderna pharmaceutical and biotechnology company's CEO Stephane Bancel speaks during a session of the World Economic Forum (WEF) annual meeting in Davos, Jan. 18, 2023.
Fabrice Coffrini/AFP via Getty Images, FILE
Among the critics of Moderna's reported consideration of a price increase -- from about $26 a shot to as much as $130 -- was Sen. Bernie Sanders, who has long advocated for government-funded health care and alleged the move would result in deaths.
"How many of these Americans will die from COVID 19 as a result of limited access to these lifesaving vaccines?"
Sanders, I-Vt., wrote in a January letter to Moderna.
"While nobody can predict the exact figure, the number could well be in the thousands.
In the midst of a deadly pandemic, restricting access to this much needed vaccine is unconscionable," he added.
Now, Moderna will be the sole manufacturer of COVID vaccines offering its shot for free to the uninsured.
Under federal regulation, insurance companies are already required to foot the bill for COVID vaccines.
Sen. Bernie Sanders in Washington, Feb. 7, 2023.
J. Scott Applewhite/AP, FILE
"Moderna remains committed to ensuring that people in the United States will have access to our COVID-19 vaccines regardless of ability to pay," the company wrote in its statement.
"Moderna's COVID-19 vaccines will continue to be available at no cost for insured people whether they receive them at their doctors' offices or local pharmacies.
For uninsured or underinsured people, Moderna's patient assistance program will provide COVID-19 vaccines at no cost" after the public health emergency expires.
To date, the federal government paid for all COVID vaccines for Americans, whether they were insured or not using emergency money passed by Congress.
But President Joe Biden says he plans to let the nationwide public health emergency expire May 11.
Once that happens, federal support ends for many of the programs put in place to help uninsured Americans, including expanded Medicaid, testing and treatments.
Last month, the World Health Organization said COVID-19 remains a public health emergency worldwide, but that the pandemic was at a "transition point.
"
WHO Director-General Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the "global response remains hobbled because in too many countries, these powerful, life-saving tools are still not getting to the populations that need them most – especially older people and health workers."
The following essay is reprinted with permission from The Conversation, an online publication covering the latest research.
Every fall and winter, viral respiratory illnesses like the common cold and seasonal flu keep kids out of school and social activities.
But this year, more children than usual are ending up at emergency departments and hospitals.
On supporting science journalism
If you're enjoying this article, consider supporting our award-winning journalism by subscribing.
By purchasing a subscription you are helping to ensure the future of impactful stories about the discoveries and ideas shaping our world today.
In California, the Orange County health department declared a state of emergency in early November 2022 due to record numbers of pediatric hospitalizations for respiratory infections.
In Maryland, emergency rooms have run out of beds because of the unusually high number of severe respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, infections.
So emergency departments there are having to refer patients across state lines for care.
In the U.S., the winter respiratory virus season started earlier than usual this year.
Since peak infections usually occur in late December or January, this uncharacteristic early wave suggests that the situation could get much worse for people of all ages, particularly children.
We are epidemiologists with expertise in epidemic analysis for emerging disease threats, including respiratory infections.
We watch patterns in these infections closely, and we pay particular attention when the patterns are unusual.
We’ve grown increasingly concerned about the amount of pediatric hospitalizations over the last few months and the pattern that is emerging.
The ‘triple threat’
In early November, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued a health advisory about increased activity in respiratory infections – especially among children.
The CDC and other health experts are warning of the so-called “triple threat” of respiratory illness from RSV, influenza – or the seasonal flu – and COVID-19.
The underlying reasons for the convergence of these viruses and the increase in infections so early in the season are not yet clear.
But health experts have some clues about contributing factors and what it could mean for the coming months.
When it comes to COVID-19, 2022 is expected to usher in another winter wave of infections, similar to patterns seen in 2020 and 2021.
Previous winter surges stemmed from a combination of factors, including the emergence and spread of new viral variants, more people gathering indoors rather than distanced outside, and people coming together for the holidays.
But unlike previous pandemic winters, most COVID-19 precautions – such as using masks in public areas or avoiding group activities – are more relaxed than ever.
Together with the looming threat of new variants, it is difficult to predict how big the next COVID-19 wave could be.
And while the seasonal flu has proved somewhat unpredictable during the COVID-19 pandemic, it nearly always hits during late October.
Flu season also arrived about a month early and in greater numbers than in recent history.
By our read of the data, pediatric flu hospitalizations are nearing 10 times what has been seen for this time of year for more than a decade.
RSV infections tend to follow a similar seasonal pattern as the flu, peaking in winter months.
But this year, there was an unexpected summer wave, well before the start of the typical fall respiratory virus season.
In typical years, RSV garners little media attention.
It’s incredibly common and usually causes only mild illness.
In fact, most children encounter the virus before age 2.
But RSV can be a formidable respiratory infection with serious consequences for children under 5, especially infants.
It is the most common cause of lower respiratory infections in young children, and more severe illnesses can lead to pneumonia and other complications, often requiring hospitalization.
Why children are particularly at risk
Children, especially young children, tend to get sicker from flu and RSV than other age groups.
But infants younger than 6 months old stand to suffer the most, with nearly double the risk of RSV-related death compared to other children younger than 5. COVID-19 hospitalization rates are also four to five times higher for infants than older children.
One reason the youngest children are at greater risk is that their immune systems are not yet fully developed and don’t produce the robust immune response seen in most adults.
What’s more, infants younger than 6 months – who are most at risk of severe disease – are still too young to be vaccinated against influenza or COVID-19.
These viruses present challenges on their own, but their co-circulation and coinciding surges in infections create a perfect storm for multiple viruses to infect the same person at once.
Viruses might even act together to evade immunity and cause damage to the respiratory tract.
Such co-infections are typically uncommon.
However, the likelihood of co-infection is substantially higher for children than adults.
Co-infections can be difficult to diagnose and treat, and can ultimately lead to greater disease severity, complications, hospitalization and death.
Factors behind the triple threat
There are a few reasons why the U.S. may be seeing a surge in pediatric respiratory infections.
First, COVID-19 protection strategies actually help prevent the transmission of other respiratory pathogens.
School and daycare closures likely also minimized exposures children normally have to various respiratory viruses.
These and other efforts to prevent the spread of COVID-19 seem to have suppressed the broad circulation of other viruses, including influenza and RSV.
As a result, the U.S. saw an overall drop in non-COVID respiratory infections – and an almost nonexistent flu season in the winter of 2020.
The decreased viral activity means that children missed out on some exposures to viruses and other pathogens that typically help build immunity, particularly during the first few years of life.
The resulting so-called “immunity debt” may contribute to an excess of pediatric respiratory infections as we continue into this season.
To further complicate the picture, the changing nature of viruses, including theemergence of new COVID-19 variants and the natural evolution of seasonal influenza viruses, means that we could be seeing a unique combination of particularly transmissible strains or strains that cause more severe illness.
Proactive steps people can take
The early surge in respiratory infections with high rates of hospitalization highlights the importance of prevention.
The best tool we have for prevention is vaccination.
Vaccines that protect against COVID-19 and influenza are available and recommended for everyone over 6 months of age.
They have been shown to be safe and effective, and they can and do save lives.
In particular, most recent data on the newly updated bivalent COVID-19 booster vaccine suggests that it produces a more rigorous antibody response against the current circulating omicron variants than the original COVID-19 vaccines.
The best way to protect infants younger than 6 months old against flu and COVID-19 is by vaccination during pregnancy.
When a pregnant mother is vaccinated, maternal antibodies cross the placenta to the baby, reducing the risk of COVID-19 hospitalization in young infants by 61%.
Vaccination of other caregivers, family and friends can also help protect infants.
Other preventive measures, like hand-washing, covering sneezes and coughs, staying at home and isolating when sick, can help to protect the community from these viruses and others.
Paying attention to local public health advisers can also help people to have the most up-to-date information and make informed decisions to keep themselves and others – of all ages – safe.
This article was originally published on The Conversation.
Read the original article.
WASHINGTON — House Republicans demanding spending cuts in exchange for raising the nation’s debt limit have rallied around a seemingly straightforward proposal: recalling billions of dollars in coronavirus relief funds that Congress approved but have not been spent.
Top Republicans regard the idea of rescinding unspent pandemic emergency money — an amount estimated to be between $50 billion and $70 billion — as an easy way to save money while avoiding more politically perilous options like cutting funding for popular federal programs.
Their focus on the idea reflects how, after toiling unsuccessfully for months to unite their rank and file around a fiscal blueprint, G.O.P. leaders have become acutely aware that they have few options for doing so that could actually pass the House.
On Wednesday, Speaker Kevin McCarthy highlighted the measure when he finally unveiled House Republicans’ proposal to raise the debt limit for one year in exchange for a series of spending cuts and policy changes.
The party plans to vote on the legislation next week.
“The American people are tired of politicians who use Covid as an excuse for more extreme inflationary spending,” Mr. McCarthy said in a speech on the House floor.
“If the money was authorized to fight the pandemic, what was not spent during the pandemic should not be spent after the pandemic is over.”
More than 1,000 people have pleaded guilty or have been convicted on federal charges of defrauding the myriad COVID-19 relief programs that Congress established in the early days of the pandemic.
And over 600 other people and entities face federal fraud charges.
But that's just the start, according to investigators scheduled to testify Wednesday to a congressional committee as House Republicans mark the beginning of what they promise will be aggressive oversight of President Joe Biden's administration.
The House Committee on Oversight and Accountability is holding its first hearing in the new Congress on fraud and waste in federal pandemic spending.
In total, Congress approved about $4.6 trillion in spending from six coronavirus relief laws, beginning in March 2020 when Donald Trump was president.
"We owe it to the American people to get to the bottom of the greatest theft of American taxpayer dollars in history," said the chairman of the committee, Rep. James Comer, Republican of Kentucky.
The Government Accountability Office is expected to tell the committee that the number of cases of suspected fraud is certain to grow in the coming months.
For example, the inspector general for the Small Business Administration has more than 500 ongoing investigations involving loan programs designed to help businesses meet operating expenses during the pandemic.
The inspector general for the Labor Department continues to open at least 100 unemployment insurance fraud investigations each week.
The GAO said the more than 1,000 convictions related to COVID-19 relief fraud are one measure of how extensive it was.
It's unknown how much money was lost to fraud, the GAO also said, but it reported in December that an extrapolation of Labor Department data would suggest more than $60 billion in fraudulent unemployment insurance payments during the pandemic.
But the GAO also warned that such an extrapolation has inherent limitations and should be interpreted with caution.
Still, lawmakers are anxious to discern how much theft has occurred and what can be done to stop it in future emergencies.
"We must identify where this money went, how much ended up in the hands of fraudsters or ineligible participants, and what should be done to ensure it never happens again," Comer said.
Some 20 inspectors general work collaboratively to investigate pandemic relief spending.
Michael Horowitz, who chairs a committee Congress created in March 2020 to lead oversight of COVID-19 spending, is also scheduled to testify.
In his prepared remarks, Horowitz said the committee issued a fraud alert this week regarding the use of more than 69,000 questionable Social Security numbers to obtain $5.4 billion in pandemic loans and grants.
Also testifying is David Smith, an assistant director of the Office of Investigations at the U.S. Secret Service, who predicts that efforts to recover stolen assets and hold criminals accountable for pandemic fraud will continue for years to come.
Geography’s linguistic turn.
From spatial essentialism to linguistic reconstruction
Since the 1970s, a turn to the humanities, including e.g. hermeneutics, phenomenology, social and cultural theory, took hold of geography, puzzled and stimulated theoretical discussion and enriched its range of perspectives and methodological approaches.
The “linguistic turn” was received within geography in the context of constructivist theory: space and place were no longer considered to be simple physical entities but, instead, they were the outcome of complex societal processes, actions and structures; in short: space and place were considered to be cultural, social, and, at its core, linguistic constructions.
For example, Barnes and Duncan (1992), inspired by literary studies, claimed in their influential volume “Writing Worlds”: “For what is true is made inside texts, not outside of them…” (Barnes and Duncan, 1992, p. 3) – a clear critique of traditional geography and its unreflected spatial essentialism.
Duncans and Gregory’s “writes of passage” (1999) followed a similar argument: in the reconstruction of historic travel writing the meaning of space and place, not only its obvious physical and material appearance becomes visible.
In his renewal of cultural geography, Peter Jackson shifts his focus towards “maps of meaning” as he perceived - among other subjects - the critique of “languages of racism” to be constitutive for a “new cultural geography” (Jackson, 1989, pp. 132ff).
Werlen (2007, pp. 343ff), exploring the potential of Anthony Giddens‘ theory of structuration for social geography, coined the phrase of “symbolic regionalisation” to refer to the manifold ways of linguistic and visual constructions of space as did Anssii Paasi’s research on regional identity (Paasi, 1991).
Given this background, the path towards a more detailed analysis of the relationship between language and space was marked; several strands of linguistics became a source of methodological innovation in human geography, especially for qualitative empirical research in human geography.
In the last decades linguistic constructivism has been both contested and informed by “non-” and “more-than-representational theory”, a “new materialism” (Lorimer, 2005; Whatmore, 2006; Thrift, 2007) and “post-phenomenology” (Ash and Simpson, 2016) – which appears at first sight as a simple counter-balance in order to reinstate some kind of “material”/“ideal” equilibrium.
But more interestingly, it has extended the view of geography’s linguistic constructivism towards concepts of practice, event, performance, presence, and experience.
These concepts have in common to shift the geographic understanding of language from static word-object-reference (in fact, the linguistic representation of an assumed “pre-representational” world) towards a generic understanding of language and space.
Daya (2019, p. 373) observes “…a shift away from the notion of representation as signification to an understanding of texts and images as generative…” – a perspective which is already present in the philosophy of language and in action theory, namely as the foundation of language in bodily experience (image schema), the performance of discoursive power (e.g. the naming of things as the creation of things) and, most explicitly, in the pragmatist concept of the “speech act” (Austin, 1962).
In the following, the geographical reception of three linguistic paradigms will be described in more detail: cognitive linguistics, discourse theory and analysis, and language pragmatics (see Fig. 1 and Table 1).
Fig. 1: Argumentation and reasoning acting as hinge between cognitive linguistics and discourse analysis.
Discourse as socio-linguistic vantage point is not fully compatible with methodology from cognitive linguistics.
In adding the layer of pragmatics, reasoning & argumentation that act as hinge, we conceptually overcome this shortage.
This figure is covered by the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
Copyright © the authors of this paper, all rights reserved.
Full size image
Table 1 Linguistic perspectives, spatial aspects and COVID-19-references.
Full size table
Language and space in cognitive linguistics: metaphors and image schemas
Cognitive linguistics proved to be a vital source for social geography’s interest in language and its spatial implications.
Lakoff and Johnson’s (1980) groundbreaking work on metaphors and the redefinition of their role for human life revealed both the importance of spatial thinking for everyday language practice as well as the relevance of cognitive linguistics for geographical thinking.
Conceptual metaphors, or put more fundamentally, so-called “image schemas”Footnote 1, are not secondary aesthetic ornaments of language or sophistic means taken from the rhetorical “toolbox”.
Instead, they form a basic set of frameworks for our cognition, imagination, and, thus, our language practice:
“Image schemas are relatively simple structures that constantly recur in our everyday bodily experience: CONTAINERS, PATHS, LINKS, FORCES, BALANCE, and in various orientations and relations: UP-DOWN, FRONT-BACK, PART-WHOLE, CENTER-PHERIPHERY, etc.”
(Lakoff, 1987, p. 267).
Knowledge and common beliefs on the existence and shape of place and space are rooted in bodily metaphors in our thinking and speaking.
Geography’s usual subjects such as place, territory, region, or landscape can be derived from their origin in human cognition and in linguistic metaphors or image schemata.
Schlottmann (2008) highlighted the function of the container-metaphor in making sense of the spatial world:
“…the container concept seems to be one of the most common ways of referring to a surrounding world.
Spatial entities, for instance, are normally imagined and treated as vessels that contain various objects (people, matters, resources, etc), or as boxes in which objects are (or shall be) placed” (Schlottmann, 2008, p. 828).
Schlottmann showed in her analysis of the language use on Germany’s unification that despite the frequently repeated rhetorics of unification the general assumption of separated spatial containers (West-Germany/East-Germany) remained intact.
The cognitive structure of spatial imagination constantly reproduced language patterns of separation (ibid., p. 831).
In addition, Weichhart and Weixlbaumer (1988) and Shortridge (1985) were able to show that place images prove to be very stable and independent from material changes in the “real world”.
Thus, sociocultural concepts are more likely to change their spatial reference than their associated semantics, if the living environment of the specific place changes.
Further, the centre-periphery schema is a recurring implicit element of the medial construction of regional identities.
In putting the adressed region in the imaginative centre of space a sense of originality, prominence and superiority is assigned to the promoted region (Felgenhauer et al., 2005, p. 55).
Various techniques of “othering” can easily rely on such patterns in the sense that they align spatial with social distinction.
Potential conclusions from empirical work on spatialisation and containerisation were intensively discussed within human geography (Schlottmann, 2008, pp.
823ff).
On the one hand, increasingly globalised and networked spatial “relational” realities have to be reflected in a modified everyday language use and, thus, the language of static containers would have to be overcome - both in science and society.
On the other hand, the function of containerisation for reducing complexity and making sense of the world has to be acknowledged and cannot be changed easily.
Discourse analysis on space and place
Discourse theory and analysis made a profound contribution to our current understanding on how language, society, and politics are intertwined (e.g. Kendall and Wickham, 1999; Chilton, 2004; Wodak and Chilton, 2005).
The power of hegemonic discourse patterns, of strategic wordings and the explicit and implicit discoursive framing of societal phenomena and problems represent both, the possibilities and boundaries of social interaction.
While theoretically contingent in the sense of linguistic constructivism, discourse patterns often prove to be highly stable and effective power structures – not only with regard to the often highlighted issues of class, race, and gender.
Especially, spatial and territorial definitions, distinctions and oppositions remain a vital element in ever changing social and political environments on every scale level (e.g. Glasze, 2013; Mattissek, 2008; Rheindorf and Wodak, 2018).
For example, local and regional identities, nationalist ideologies, geopolitics, and imaginations of global development depend in their very existence on both vital and stable discoursive structures.
Thus, geography’s perception of discourse theory and methodology has intensified since the beginning of the 21st century, especially in Germany.
Examples originate from various sub-disciplines, from urban, social, cultural and political geography.
For example, Mattissek (2008) analysed the neoliberal city-marketing strategies of Frankfurt, Cologne and Leipzig and their attempts to promote a particular framing of the urban discourse.
The global cultural politics of France and the construction of a “francophone world” were subjects of extended research conducted by Glasze (2013).
Marxhausen (2010) investigated the discoursive formation of European identity, as it is promoted in education policies and in public narratives of the cultural and spatial “essence” of Europe.
Discourse theory and analysis were originally seen as a counterpart to the perspective of cognitive linguistics.
However, in the current linguistic discussion “discourse” and “image schema” are no longer to be treated as mutually exclusive theoretical approaches.
Instead, connections between cognitive approaches in general (Wodak, 2006) and cognitive metaphor theory (CMT, see Hardie et al., 2007) in particular have long been explored to contribute in the context of critical discourse analysis (CDA, see Semino et al., 2004), work continued by Musloff (2012) and Hampe (2017).
Perspectives on the interplay between metaphor/image schema on the one hand and discourse on the other are also provided by language pragmatics, as it can be seen in the example of (spatial) argumentation and reasoning.
Speech act, pragmatics, and argumentation
Everyday language use and its relevance for the construction of (social) reality has been fully acknowledged by Wittgenstein’s (1953) pioneering philosophy of language and the more specific theoretical outline of the matter by John Austin’s concept of “speech act” (Austin, 1962).
The long-standing opposite of “doing” (primary status) and “speaking” (secondary status) was transcended by showing how words do not primarily represent the outside “non-” or “pre-linguistic” world in the sense of unidirectional reference.
Instead, words, combined in the unit of “speech acts”, contribute to a complex web of meaning construction through implicit expression, inference and internal linguistic logics (e.g. Davidson, 2009 [1983]; Searle, 1969).
Philosopher Robert Brandom (2000) has renewed this perspective.
According to his concept of “inferentialism” language use is characterised by social commitment, entitlement, and constant mental “score-keeping” on the ontological status which people assign to things by everyday language use.
In doing so, people constantly have to admit to implicit meanings in order to make explicit statements (as they wish them to be understood and accepted by others).
This field of everyday practice has also been addressed by contemporary argumentation theory.
According to Toulmin (1976 [1958]), argumentation theory and analysis is not so much about assessing the objective logic quality of a particular argument.
Instead, the use of the argument in a social context has to be interpreted in order to understand both its internal logics and its discoursive relevance and meaning.
In his well-known schema (see examples below), Toulmin considered an argument to consist of a Claim (or Conclusion) which is supported by Data.
The Warrant is the rule which explains why the Data is suited to support the Claim.
The so-called Backing collects general conditions and principles on which the Warrant depends.
Thus, as argumentation practices combine explicit statements and implicit assumptions they interlink cognition and discourse (see, Fig. 1).
Argumentation analysis has been applied by human geographers with regard to subjects as diverse as regional identity (Felgenhauer, 2010), the appropriation of urban environments (Kremer, 2013), or energy production (Faller, 2016).
The schema can also be applied to statements taken from German media discourse on the pandemic (DWDSFootnote 2) which are presented in the following.
Detail analysis 1
Footnote 3: If we know how the Virus is acting, we have to do everything to slow down the spread of the virus (Bavarian Minister Herrmann; Merkur, 2020).
Detail analysis 2 : To close off whole cities and regions is more effective, because, then, non-symptomatic people also reduce contacts to other people.
(DWDS/Tagesspiegel, 2020).
Furthermore, with regard to argumentative reasoning about spatially organised information, we have knowledge of several productive patterns from the fields of cognitive geography and computer science.
For example, place descriptions are bound to anchor concepts in communications that are expected to be common sense (Couclelis et al., 1987).
Second, spatial and spatialized knowledge is composed of fragments from own experiences, visualisations and communications, coined mental collage by Tversky (1993).
In this mental collage, spatial concepts range from the level of deep grounding (e.g. on wayfinding task, see Richter et al., 2013) to aggregated and fluid levels of uncertain regions (e.g. on evaluating unsafety, see Redepenning et al., 2010; Moura de Sousa et al., 2022).
Although we recognise the impactful work that has been spent on the topic of metonymy, following Littlemore (2015, p. 14), we distinguish metaphor from metonymy by involving cross-domain-mapping in the sense of Lakoff (1987).
In our work, we focus on cross-domain-mappings utilised for the purpose of deliberation in argumentative structures.
Interestingly, in confirmation between findings from both cognitive (Delafield-Butt and Trevarthen, 2015) and social sciences (new materialism, Farnell, 1996), there is strong evidence that reasoning is not exclusively bound to mere logic of thought, but massively accelerated by bodily enactable mental models.
Lakoff and Johnson (1980) illustrate that on the following example:
“France fell into a recession and Germany pulled it out.”
While such reductions of complexity are often framed as metonymy, as stated above we read such figuration as metaphors that sketch an easy to imagine bodily relational space.
As France and Germany both act as persons, the abstract process of a recession is figurated as something one could fall into, e.g. a hole or trap.
The crises itself is thus framed as an accident that requires external help.
Transforming reasoning into bodily enaction thus creates the image of a passing by first responder helping out.
Additionally, human reasoners are known to routinely change scales by spatial specialisation and generalisation (Richter et al., 2013).
Source 1 : “What is the bus from Bielefeld doing here?
They should go home, in Lower Saxony there is corona!”
(Kremer, 2020)
In this example, simplified reasoning by generalisation takes place on several levels: (1) A bus with a licence plate from Bielefeld is personified (to carry people from Bielefeld).
(2) The German federal state of Niedersachsen is known to have reported a high number of COVID-19 infections lately.
(3) Bielefeld is thought to be a city in NiedersachsenFootnote 4 (generalisation by zooming out).
From these constituents the consequence is derived that people from that bus would put a not acceptable risk to people at their current location (cf.
Kremer, 2020).
To conclude this short overview on the geographic work on language and space, the three linguistic perspectives (see Fig. 1) can be applied to the example of spatial metaphors in the COVID-19 discourse.
Discourse theory and analysis focusses on social/political power structures which establish hegemonic interpretations of the pandemic.
For example, as reflected in the term “China-Virus”, coined by the US administration, it becomes not only an inherently spatial phenomenon.
The term also determines how the pandemic is mapped and represented on a global scale (critical: Zhang and Xu, 2020).
Spatial argumentation and inter-subjective/inferential reasoning combines cognitive metaphors and well-established hegemonic discoursive meanings.
As the two examples above have shown, political actors claim their decisions to be suitable or even “inevitable” by referring to spatial assumptions.
With regard to cognitive linguistics and bodily experience the container metaphor provides a basic pattern for framing the pandemic in a semantic as well as in a practical sense (means of containment).
Again, the overview emphasises the role of argumentation and reasoning as the “interface” of cognition and public discourse.
In doing so, it places cognitive concepts within the context of evident language use and practice as well as it might extend the focus of discourse analysis from power and hegemony towards the inherent inferential structure of particular statements.
The individual perspective of each of the three paradigms and the corresponding geographical aspects with regard to COVID-19 are outlined in Table 1.
In our explorative prestudy (see Section “Explorative Pre-study”) we focussed on spatial metaphors as the main component of spatial argumentation.
They combine cognitive/experiential and argumentative/inferential practices.
Within the German media discourse on corona patterns of containerisation, personification and naturalisation proved to be most relevant.
Current research on metaphors and COVID-19
Metaphors of crises are a well-known topic, so that we can relate to earlier work to frame our expectations on our empirical results.
As a side note, the term crisis, originally used for a deciding moment in the course of a disease, was used to indicate a ‘turning point’ in general (Hülk, 2014).
Whereas the term ‘catastrophe’ indicates severe life-threatening consequences on society which cannot be mitigated by individual action, “apocalypse” refers to a global inevitable scenario of loss of human life.
‘Crisis’ is thought to be an event that can be governed in the existing structure of society with a certain effort (Lickhardt and Weber, 2014).
Ziem (2015) and Wengeler and Ziem (2014) provide a detailed insight into argumentative elements of crisis discourses.
Their findings explicitly relate to Lakoff and Johnson (1980) in pointing out that in times of a crisis, cross domain mappings occur with the purpose to map a complex problem to a familiar target domain for efficient decision making.
Frequent target domains of those metaphors cover natural disasters as observable reference processes alongside socio-technical metaphors for causal-functional aspects of the crisis.
Applying those naturalisation approaches, affected objects, temporal phases of the crisis, consequences and potential profiteers become visible.
Metaphors of war and fight help to foster mitigation measures, whereas crises framed as diseases - even in the case of political or economic crisis - relate to the original sense of crisis in health as a deciding moment, in which the outcome of the crisis is determined.
The personification of a crisis allows for the usage of the immense human capability to assign motivations, goals and intentional actions in a search for counteractions.
The use of metaphors is common in economic crises (O’Mara-Shimek et al., 2015) and even a deliberately set rhetoric means in politics (Charteris-Black, 2011).
In the context of spatial metaphors, our study can already take profit from exploratory studies on the COVID-19 pandemic.
First hand, one might expect the pandemic to be a capsular place not attached to any specific location (Bissell, 2021).
In framing the pandemic as a rapid process, war metaphors were very productive, both indicating a connotation of seriousness and urgency (Semino, 2021) and a call for defensive actions and victory conditions (Chapman and Miller, 2020).
At least in the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, common defensive tactics of othering known from diseases like AIDS (Craig, 2020) were applied to attach the disease to racial or regional attributes (Kremer, 2020).
But other than spatial metaphors used in the context of diseases like cancer (spread), the war on COVID seams to be primarily structured temporally (waves, see Craig, 2020).
The main fallacy using war metaphors in this context is to frame the pandemic as an inevitable external threat without means of prevention.
In response, Semino (2021) proposes to discuss the alternative metaphor of fire fighting that involves phases of different measures, but does not account for asymptomatic transmission either.
On second visit, although, the intense use of terms like hotspot, break-outs or wildfires refers to metaphors of spatial bound natural disasters that run rapidly and on a large scale (Bissell, 2021).
Looking deeper into the spatiality of COVID-19 metaphors, Brinks and Ibert (2020) propose to use the TPSN-Framework (Territory - Place - Scale - Network) of Jessop et al. (2008) to account for the spatial granularity of measures taken.
Wearing a mask, for example is bound to action networks at certain places (e.g. supermarkets), whereas contagion measures are bound to the territoriality on the legislative regions (Brinks and Ibert, 2020).
‘Hopeful Tomorrow’ commemorates COVID care
A new mosaic work of art reflects the light coming in the Penn State Heart and Vascular Institute Critical Care Unit (HVICCU) south entrance lobby.
The art itself reflects so much more.
“This special artwork pays homage to the strength and resilience our nurses found during the height of pandemic patient care,” said Claire de Boer, director of Center Stage Arts in Health, which provides arts programming to the Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center and Penn State College of Medicine community.
Penn State Health
The RITE Stuff
Center Stage collected the bags used to store N95 masks on-site at the beginning of 2020 when personal protective equipment (PPE) was in short supply.
Professional mosaic artist Gail Jones of Muncy Valley, Pa., took the bags and cut, painted and arranged the pieces into a glimmering composite titled “Hopeful Tomorrow.”
“The transformation of this material honors the caregivers who bravely worked in the unit during the height of COVID,” de Boer said
One outcome of COVID is the ease with which people can connect digitally.
Jones was able to watch the unveiling of the art from her studio.
She said she was humbled and amazed to see how many staff came out for the event.
“A thrill went through me, along with other emotions.
My hope is that the art evokes a sense of calm, joy and hope.”
Jaime Rank, HVICCU clinical staff leader, championed the project.
“When the art piece was unveiled, I was speechless, overwhelmed with a rainbow of emotions and flooded with memories and snapshots of moments in time during the COVID-19 pandemic.
We were truly transformed into heroes overnight and together our ICU team persevered to give the care and comfort our patients so desperately needed.”
Rank explained that as viewers peer closely at the artwork, they will recognize the small pieces of the PPE bags that Nikki Clutton, patient care secretary, put countless hours into decorating and individualizing for each member of the care team.
“The bags were just what we needed to make us smile and feel special during a difficult time in our profession.
Just like our health care team, our bags have now been transformed into a timeless piece of art.
The spirit of the art takes my breath away,” Rank said.
Clutton said “Hopeful Tomorrow” makes her smile whenever she sees it.
“I really enjoyed making the bags for my unit.
I started with just the name and a small design, and it grew into an individualized design specific to each person.
It was an unexpected way to make people smile during a difficult time.”
“This unit cared for the sickest of our patients.
Our nurses were their families, their ministers, their friends and their caregivers,” said Michele Szkolnicki, senior vice president and chief nursing officer at the Milton S. Hershey Medical Center.
“They took tremendous pride in the recovery of every individual.
I am so glad that they have this beautiful piece of art to remind them of their beloved patients and each individual’s journey into the future that they helped to ensure.”
Long after people who have recovered and moved on with their lives, this art will be here to celebrate the care they received in the HVICCU, said Deborah Addo, Penn State Health executive vice president and chief operating officer.
“’Hopeful Tomorrow’ truly reflects the emotions we are all feeling as we move into brighter days.”
Dr. Ashish Jha, who coordinated the White House’s coronavirus pandemic response for the last year, will leave the Biden administration and return to his previous post as dean of the School of Public Health at Brown University.
In a statement announcing Dr. Jha’s departure, Mr. Biden praised him for having “effectively translated and communicated complex scientific challenges into concrete actions that helped save and improve the lives of millions of Americans.”
Dr. Jha plans to leave the White House on June 15, according to a senior administration official familiar with the timing.
Mr. Jha joined the administration in April 2022 as the United States and the rest of the world were emerging from the worst effects of the pandemic.
He replaced Jeffrey D. Zients, Mr. Biden’s first Covid coordinator, who is now the president’s chief of staff.
Unvaccinated teachers and child care workers are among those no longer required to undergo regular COVID testing, according to an executive order signed by New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy on Monday.
The new mandate, effective immediately, applies to school districts, child care centers, and state contractors that have requirements for employees to be vaccinated or face routine testing.
The news – regarding one of the few remaining pandemic restrictions intended to limit the spread of the virus – comes three weeks before Newark Public School students are set to begin classes.
Currently, masks are required at all Newark Public Schools facilities.
Students are expected to wear masks this school year.
The district did not immediately respond to whether or not it would apply the new mandate.
As of June 17, children 6 months or older are eligible for the COVID-19 vaccine.
According to the state, more than 18.4 million doses of the COVID-19 vaccine have been administered in New Jersey, with more than 1.9 million doses administered to children under the age of 18.
“Today’s executive order follows guidance from public health officials at the CDC regarding responsible steps states can take as we continue to adjust to the endemic reality of COVID-19,” Murphy said.
“With children as young as 6 months old now eligible for vaccines and millions of New Jerseyans vaccinated and boosted, more of our residents are safe from severe illness due to COVID-19.”
Some charter schools in Newark won’t be affected by the new mandate as they require teachers and staff to be vaccinated upon employment.
Barbara Martinez, the spokesperson for North Star Academy, said the school’s teachers must be vaccinated to work at the academy but was unsure if COVID protocols would change in the future.
KIPP New Jersey also has a vaccine mandate in place for all staff members, unless they qualify for a medical or religious exemption.
“As a result, we have very few unvaccinated staff members,” said Jessica Shearer, KIPP New Jersey spokesperson.
Per the new policy outlined by the state, they will not be requiring staff to participate in COVID testing this school year as well.
Last year, the Newark Teachers Union said 90% of its approximately 4,000 members are vaccinated.
But only 2,556 teachers, or 64%, had uploaded vaccination proof into the employee portal as of Oct. 2021, the district said at the time.
Last week, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released new guidelines for schools that end quarantines and regular screening tests for the virus but recommended students and staff should keep masks on in areas with high levels of COVID spread.
Schools aren’t required to follow these recommendations and states and cities can still set their own rule.
The change also applies to state contractors as of Sept. 1.
The New Jersey state employee testing program will also come to an end on Sept. 1.
Jessie Gomez is a reporter for Chalkbeat Newark, covering public education in the city.
Contact Jessie at jgomez@chalkbeat.org
A new report from KFF (Kaiser Family Foundation) and The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) finds that donor governments disbursed US$7.5 billion in 2021 to combat HIV in low- and middle-income countries, largely flat amid the COVID-19 pandemic and essentially matching 2008 levels, against a backdrop of growing inflation and shrinking funding from other sources.
While the total is less than in 2020, that largely occurred due to the timing of payments from donor nations to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and not a reduction in support.
Donor governments’ bilateral aid – provided directly to specific countries, rather than to the Global Fund or other multilateral organizations – was US$5.5 billion in 2021, a slight decline compared to US$5.6 billion in 2020, continuing a decade-long trend of decreasing bilateral support.
The United States continues to be the largest donor to HIV, providing US$5.5 billion in support (73% of all donor government funding), followed by the United Kingdom (5% or US$385 million).
Other major donors include, Germany (US$246 million), the European Commission (US$232 million), and France (US$231 million).
“This report confirms a decade of decline in donor aid for HIV.
As the COVID-19 and Ukraine crises have dramatically increased the needs of low and middle-income countries and decreased the domestic revenues for the coming years, a stepping up of donor aid is even more vital,” said Winnie Byanyima, Executive Director of UNAIDS.
“Aid for the AIDS response is a smart and effective investment.
Now is the time for donors to be courageous and deliver on the common pledge to end AIDS by 2030.”
“While donor government funding for HIV has been relatively stable during the global COVID-19 pandemic, there’s a lot of uncertainty about whether funding will keep pace with global inflation amid other priorities,” KFF Senior Vice President Jen Kates said.
The funding supports HIV care and treatment, prevention, and other services in low- and moderate-income countries.
The data are included in a broader UNAIDS global report, which examines all sources of funding for HIV relief, including local governments, non-governmental organizations, and the private sector.
The new report, produced as a long-standing partnership between KFF and UNAIDS for more than 15 years, provides the latest data available on donor government funding based on data provided by governments.
“Donor government funding” refers to disbursements, or payments, made by donors.
School District of Philadelphia releases 2023-2024 COVID protocols
As students are preparing for a new year, the School District of Philadelphia released its COVID protocols.
As students are preparing for a new year, the School District of Philadelphia released its COVID protocols.
As students are preparing for a new year, the School District of Philadelphia released its COVID protocols.
As students are preparing for a new year, the School District of Philadelphia released its COVID protocols.
PHILADELPHIA (WPVI) --
The School District of Philadelphia has released its COVID protocols for the 2023-2024 school year.
Masking will be optional for students and staff except when determined necessary to fight an outbreak.
Those who have been exposed to COVID will be encouraged to wear a mask for 10 days.
Students who test positive will be required to isolate at home for at least five days and participate in virtual learning.
They will also need to wear a mask for five days after returning.
You can find a full list of the district's health and safety protocols on the school district's website.
AMA News Wire Omicron and BA.5:
Questions patients may have and how to answer
Fueled by a highly transmissible subvariant of the COVID-19 Omicron variant, known as BA.5, SARS-CoV-2 infections are on the rise again.
Even situations that have seemed to carry a relatively low risk, such as outdoor gatherings, may now pose a greater threat.
Half the dues, all the AMA benefits!
AMA membership offers unique access to savings and resources tailored to enrich the personal and professional lives of physicians, residents and medical students.
Learn More
But with pandemic fatigue a pervasive reality, many have tried to move on with their lives in search of a new normal without fretting over the latest COVID-19 variants and subvariants.
Yet many others, especially people with suppressed immune systems or with underlying conditions that put them at high risk for severe COVID-19 outcomes, have been left searching for answers and further guidance on what to do.
Here are some questions patients might have about BA.5 and other Omicron subvariants, along with the answers that physicians should be ready to share.
Is the BA.5 Omicron subvariant more contagious?
Is the BA.5 Omicron subvariant more contagious?
BA.5 is one of the latest subvariants of the original Omicron lineage.
There is a unique cluster of mutations on the spike protein, which has led the BA.5 subvariant to potentially be the most contagious strain of SARS-CoV-2 so far.
But it does not appear to lead to more severe outcomes than other COVID-19 variants and subvariants.
Does the BA.5
Omicron subvariant evade immunity?
Does the BA.5
Omicron subvariant evade immunity?
The short answer is, yes, the mutations of the BA.5 subvariant have allowed it to sneak past the body’s immune system more easily.
This means if you had a previous SARS-CoV-2 infection or have been vaccinated and boosted against COVID-19, you are not completely protected.
Compared with the BA.2 subvariant, BA.5 has been able to spread more easily because of its ability to evade immune protection against infection induced by prior infection or vaccination.
This is especially if protection has waned over time, contributing to more frequent breakthrough infections and reinfections.
While breakthrough infections are not resulting in severe illness, each reinfection does carry the risk of developing long COVID, also known as post-COVID conditions.
Discover questions patients have about COVID long-haulers.
Is there risk of outdoor transmission with BA.5?
Is there risk of outdoor transmission with BA.5?
Being outside is safer than being indoors, but there are still some risks to keep in mind as the BA.5 Omicron subvariant continues to circulate.
Health professionals have noted that outdoor transmission of SARS-CoV-2 has occurred, but it’s more likely that you will acquire the virus indoors in poorly ventilated areas.
While outdoor activities are inherently safer than indoor gatherings, the heightened transmissibility of BA.5 will likely lead to spread in both settings.
One thing to note about outdoor transmission is that viral particles can disperse more quickly due to wind speed and air currents.
With that, some outdoor settings, such as a tightly packed outdoor concert, can also raise a person’s chances of acquiring SARS-CoV-2.
Sign up for Morning Rounds Get the latest news in medicine and public health delivered to your inbox Monday–Friday, and discover our weekend edition, featuring the best stories of the week.
Subscribe Now
What are the symptoms people are experiencing?
What are the symptoms people are experiencing?
BA.5 symptoms are similar to previous COVID-19 variants and subvariants.
The most common symptoms include fever, runny nose, coughing, sore throat, headache, muscle pain and fatigue.
Additionally, the presence and severity of a patient’s symptoms can be affected by their COVID-19 vaccination status, other health conditions, age and history of prior infection, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
How can I protect myself from BA.5 and other Omicron subvariants?
How can I protect myself from BA.5 and other Omicron subvariants?
The recipe for protection is one everyone should be familiar with at this stage of the pandemic.
Patients should ensure they are up to date with their COVID-19 vaccinations and boosters.
Doing so helps to protect individuals from severe disease and death.
It is also important to continue to wear a medical grade face mask or respirator—such as a N95 or KN95—when indoors and physical distancing is not possible.
It is also a good idea to wear masks in crowded outdoor settings too.
On top of getting vaccinated and boosted, wearing a mask or respirator, avoiding crowds and handwashing is also important.
Will COVID-19 vaccine booster doses help?
Will COVID-19 vaccine booster doses help?
COVID-19 vaccines remain the best public health measure to help protect people from COVID-19.
Vaccination can also help to reduce the likelihood of new variants emerging.
This includes primary series, booster doses and additional doses for those who need them.
Data is still being collected on the vaccine effectiveness against Omicron subvariants including BA.4 and BA.5.
However, vaccine effectiveness against severe disease and death remains high for other Omicron subvariants and likely also for BA.4 and BA.5.
Research published in the CDC’s Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report also shows that during both Delta- and Omicron-predominant periods, receipt of a third dose of an mRNA vaccine was highly effective at preventing COVID-19-associated emergency department and urgent care encounters as well as preventing hospitalization.
Meanwhile, a JAMA study shows that receipt of three doses of a mRNA COVID-19 vaccine—compared with being unvaccinated or having received two doses—was associated with protection against both the Omicron and Delta variants.
The AMA has developed frequently-asked-questions documents on COVID-19 vaccination covering safety, allocation and distribution, administration and more.
There are two FAQs, one designed to answer patients’ questions (PDF), and another to address physicians’ COVID-19 vaccine questions (PDF).
Related Coverage What sets apart Novavax option from other COVID-19 vaccines
Will a test tell me if I have BA.5 or another subvariant?
Will a test tell me if I have BA.5 or another subvariant?
No, a COVID-19 test will not tell you which variant of SARS-CoV-2 caused your infection.
Instead, tests will tell you whether you have a current infection.
Nucleic acid amplification tests and antigen tests can both be used.
But at-home tests are also available for rapid results.
If an at-home test is positive, isolate and speak with your physician for further guidance.
Discover what doctors wish patients knew about COVID-19 testing.
What treatments are available for Omicron and its subvariants?
What treatments are available for Omicron and its subvariants?
Some monoclonal antibody treatments are less effective against certain SARS-CoV-2 variants and subvariants, but the monoclonal antibody treatment Bebtelovimab remains effective against Omicron.
Oral antivirals, including Paxlovid, are also available to treat people with confirmed mild-to-moderate COVID-19 who are at risk of severe illness.
Learn more from the CDC about what to know about the Omicron variant.
Summary What was the 2021-2022 flu season like?
The timing and severity of the 2021-2022 influenza (flu) season was different than most seasons before the COVID-19 pandemic.
Though relatively mild, there was more activity during the 2021-2022 flu season than during the 2020-2021 flu season, and activity remained elevated later in the spring than any flu season on record.
Nationally, flu activity during the 2021-2022 season began to increase in November and remained elevated until mid-June with two different waves of influenza A(H3N2) virus activity occurring; the first peaked in late December 2021, and the second in April 2022.
Prior to the emergence of SARS-CoV-2, flu activity would most commonly begin to increase in October or November and peak in February.
Compared with pre-pandemic seasons, flu activity during the 2021-2022 season was elevated much later into the spring with a historically late second national peak in April.
While it’s not unusual to have two waves of flu activity during a season, usually the predominant flu virus during each wave is different.
When did the 2021-2022 flu season peak?
The 2021-2022 flu season featured two distinct waves of A(H3N2) viruses.
The first wave of activity peaked in mid-December throughout the country, but the timing of peak activity during the second wave varied by region ranging from mid-March through May.
Notably, the second wave, which peaked nationally in April, occurred much later than has been previously observed.
How many people were hospitalized from flu during the 2021-2022 season?
During the 2021-2022 influenza season, influenza-associated hospitalizations were monitored in two systems: the Influenza Hospitalization Surveillance Network (FluSurv-NET), which covers approximately 9% of the U.S. population, and HHS Protect Hospitalization Surveillance, which consists of reports from all U.S. hospitals.
During October 1, 2021, through June 11, 2022, a total of 5,130 laboratory-confirmed influenza-related hospitalizations were reported by FluSurv-NET sites.
Activity occurred in two waves with hospitalization rates first peaking nationally during the week ending January 1, 2022, (week 52) at 1.0 per 100,000 population.
The second, slightly higher peak, occurred during the weeks ending April 23 and April 30, 2022 (weeks 16 and 17) with a rate of 1.2 per 100,000 population.
The overall cumulative hospitalization rate was 167.5 per 100,000 population with the highest rate among adults aged ≥65 years (50.8), followed by children aged 0–4 years (21.9), adults aged 50-64 years (16.2), children aged 5-17 years (9.0) and adults aged 18-49 (9.1).
The majority (96.7%) of influenza-associated hospitalizations, were due to influenza A viruses (99.2% of those subtyped were A(H3N2) viruses).
Among those with information about underlying conditions, 93.7% of adults and 65.3% of children reported at least one underlying medical condition.
For the 2021-2022 season, HHS Protect Influenza-Associated hospitalizations were added as a component to monitor severe illness associated with influenza.
A total of 74,181 influenza-associated hospitalizations were reported between October 3, 2021, and October 1, 2022, and hospitalizations occurred during two waves of activity.
The total cumulative influenza-associated hospitalization rate in HHS Protect was 22.6 per 100,000 population.
Similar to FluSurv-NET, the first wave peaked nationally during late December (week ending January 1, 2022), and the second, higher peak occurred during mid-April (the week ending April 23, 2022).
Regionally, the timing of the second wave peak varied; regions 6 and 7 (Central and South Central) peaked in mid-March, regions 2, 3, and 5 (New York/New Jersey, Mid-Atlantic and Midwest) peaked in April; and regions 1, 4, 8, 9 and 10 (New England, Southeast, Mountain, West Coast and Pacific Northwest) peaked in May.
How many people died from flu during the 2021-2022 season?
It was estimated that about 5,000 people died from flu in the United States during the 2021-2022 season.
CDC estimates deaths in the United States using mathematical modeling.
The model used by CDC uses a ratio of deaths to hospitalizations to estimate the total number of influenza-associated deaths from the estimated number of influenza-associated hospitalizations.
To estimate the number of influenza-associated hospitalizations that occur in a flu season, CDC looks at how many in-hospital deaths are observed in the FluSurv-NET surveillance system.
The in-hospital deaths are then adjusted for under-detection of influenza,.
More information is available at How CDC Estimates the Burden of Seasonal Influenza in the U.S. Not all flu-related deaths occur in the hospital, so CDC uses death certificate data to estimate how likely influenza-associated deaths are to occur outside the hospital.
CDC looks at death certificates that have pneumonia or influenza causes (P&I), other respiratory and circulatory causes (R&C), or other non-respiratory, non-circulatory causes of death, because deaths related to flu may not have influenza listed as a cause of death.
CDC uses information on the causes of death from FluSurv-NET to determine the mixture of P&I, R&C, and other coded deaths to include in its investigation of death certificate data.
Finally, once the proportion of influenza-associated deaths that occurred outside of the hospital is estimated, an estimate of the deaths-to-hospitalization ratio is derived from it.
How many children died from flu during the 2021-2022 season?
During October 3, 2021, through October 1, 2022, 44 laboratory-confirmed flu-associated deaths in children were reported to CDC.
Forty-two were associated with an influenza A virus infection and, of the 22 influenza A viruses that were subtyped, all were A(H3N2) viruses.
Additionally, there were two cases of influenza B virus infection among the reported pediatric deaths.
The average age was 6 years, and 25 (57%) children died after admission to a hospital.
Among the 41 children with a known medical history, 25 (61%) had at least one underlying medical condition associated with increased risk for flu-related complications.
The number of deaths reported to CDC each year prior to the COVID-19 pandemic ranged from 37 (2011-2012 season) to 199 deaths (2019-2020 season).
These data have been reported to CDC since 2004, when deaths in children associated with influenza virus infection became nationally notifiable.
It is important to note that the actual number of flu-associated deaths in children is likely to be higher than what is reported by states to CDC because not all flu deaths in children are detected/reported.
Flu Activity What flu viruses circulated during the 2021-2022 season?
The majority of influenza viruses detected during the 2021-2022 flu season were A(H3N2) viruses.
Laboratory testing showed the H3N2 viruses that circulated were genetically closely related to the 2021-2022 vaccine virus.
While the number of B/Victoria viruses that circulated during the 2021-22 season was small, the majority of the B/Victoria viruses characterized were antigenically similar to the vaccine reference virus.
During the 2021-2022 influenza season (October 3, 2021 – October 1, 2022), 13 human infections with novel influenza A virus were identified.
Six A(H1N2)v virus infections were identified (one each in California, Georgia, Michigan, Ohio, Oregon and Wisconsin); five A(H3N2)v virus infections were identified (one each in Michigan and Ohio, and three in West Virginia); and one A(H1)v virus infection was identified (Oklahoma).
One avian A(H5N1) virus infection was identified in a person in Colorado with exposure to birds infected with a highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1) virus.
The A(H5N1) identification was the first positive test for avian influenza A(H5) virus in a human in the United States.
Flu Vaccine Availability How much flu vaccine was produced and distributed during the 2021-2022 season?
Flu vaccine is provided by private manufacturers, so supply depends on manufacturers.
For the 2021-2022 flu season, manufacturers distributed 179.4 million doses of flu vaccine to the U.S. market as of February 25, 2022.
CDC provided weekly updates on total flu vaccine doses distributed throughout the 2020-2021 flu season.
Were there delays in the availability of flu vaccine?
Flu vaccine manufacturers did not report any significant delays in national flu vaccine supply or distribution during 2020-2021.
How effective was the 2021-2022 flu vaccine?
Preliminary end-of-season vaccine effectiveness estimates showed that flu vaccines reduced people’s risk of mild to moderate flu illness caused by flu A(H3N2)–the most common flu virus this season–by about one-third (35% overall).
The U.S. Flu VE Network collected outpatient data on enrolled children and adults aged 6 months and older with acute respiratory illness (fever and a cough) from October 4, 2021, to April 30, 2022.
The study used a test-negative design that compared vaccination odds among influenza positive cases and influenza negative controls that did not include people testing positive for SARS-CoV-2.
Vaccine effectiveness among people 6 months and older against any influenza A virus infection was 34% with a 95% confidence interval of 19% to 46%.
Vaccine effectiveness among people 6 months and older against influenza A(H3N2) virus infection was 35% with a 95% confidence interval of 19% to 47%.
Vaccine effectiveness among people 6 months to 17 years against influenza A(H3N2) virus infection was 44% with a 95% confidence interval of 22% to 60%.
Vaccine effectiveness among people 18 to 49 years of age against influenza A(H3N2) virus infection was 27%, but not statistically significant with a 95% confidence interval of -3% to 48%.
Vaccine effectiveness in people older than 50 years could not be measured.
Vaccine effectiveness by vaccine type or against H1N1 or influenza B viruses could not be measured.
These estimates were higher than initial estimates published in “Interim Estimates of 2021– 22 Seasonal Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness — United States, February 2022”.
Preliminary early-season vaccine effectiveness estimates from March 2022 suggested flu vaccines were providing no measurable protection against mild to moderate illness caused by the most common influenza A(H3N2) virus during the 2021-2022 flu season.
The earlier estimates were lower than these end-of-season estimates because of the small number of early-season flu cases and bias related to COVID-19 illnesses.
In the past, vaccine effectiveness against H3N2 viruses has often been lower than against A(H1N1) and influenza B viruses.
These updated preliminary end-of-year vaccine effectiveness estimates are similar to what we have seen against H3N2 viruses in the past.
How many antiviral resistant viruses were detected during the 2021-2022 season?
Antiviral resistance means that a virus has changed in such a way that antiviral drugs are less effective or not effective at all in treating or preventing illnesses with that virus.
CDC conducts ongoing surveillance and testing of influenza viruses for reduced antiviral susceptibility and resistance among seasonal and novel influenza A viruses, and guidance is updated as needed.
CDC assesses susceptibility of influenza viruses to antiviral medications including the neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir, zanamivir, and peramivir) and the PA endonuclease inhibitor baloxavir, using next-generation sequence analysis supplemented by other laboratory assays.
Information about antiviral susceptibility test methods can be found at U.S. Influenza Surveillance: Purpose and Methods | CDC.
The use of adamantanes (amantadine and rimantadine) is not recommended for treatment and prevention of influenza A virus infection because of persistently high prevalence of resistance among circulating influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and influenza A(H3N2) viruses (the adamantanes are not effective against influenza B viruses).
During the 2021-2022, 0.2% of the viruses tested had markers associated with reduced susceptibility to the antiviral drugs recommended for treatment of influenza by CDC.
Resistance to the adamantane class of antiviral drugs remained widespread among influenza A viruses.
Also see: https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/2022/han00482.asp
COVID-19 Mayo Clinic Minute: How to self-care at home when you have COVID-19 Deb Balzer
Share this:
If you have tested positive for COVID-19 and are experiencing mild symptoms, you can likely recover at home.
Be sure to let your health care team know right away if you tested positive with an at-home antigen test.
If you are more likely to get very sick from COVID-19, there are medications and treatments that may help.
Dr. Melanie Swift, a Mayo Clinic preventive medicine physician, offers tips to self-care at home with COVID-19.
Watch:
The Mayo Clinic Minute
Journalists: Broadcast-quality video (0:59) is in the downloads at the end of this post.
Please courtesy: "Mayo Clinic News Network."
Read the script.
You've tested positive for COVID-19, but feel like you have a cold or flu.
"Most cases of COVID-19 actually resolve without needing any kind of prescription medication or advanced care," Dr. Swift says.
Dr. Melanie Swift says you should stay home for at least five days and isolate from others in your household during this time.
You might experience fever, chills, sore throat and muscle pain.
"It's simple things, getting rest, staying really well-hydrated," she says.
"And sometimes you may want to take a Tylenol or acetaminophen for symptoms of fever.
"
Medications, like Paxlovid, are available for people with certain risk factors, so check with your doctor right away to see if you are eligible.
"If you find that you're having trouble breathing, you need to get medical attention.
Chest pain or pressure in the chest is another reason to stop with the self-care and get medical attention," says Dr. Swift.
Read more:
For the safety of its patients, staff and visitors, Mayo Clinic has strict masking policies in place.
Anyone shown without a mask was recorded prior to COVID-19 or recorded in an area not designated for patient care, where social distancing and other safety protocols were followed.
Related Articles
What the end of the COVID-19 national emergency means for Americans
President Biden on Monday signed a Republican-authored bill terminating the national emergency over the COVID-19 pandemic, a month before the White House had said the president would unilaterally end national emergency declarations related to the pandemic.
The White House had opposed the GOP-proposed measure, which gained some bipartisan support in Congress, even though the White House planned to end emergency declarations on May 11.
The White House had said the legislation would "create wide-ranging chaos and uncertainty throughout the health care system — for states, for hospitals and doctors' offices, and, most importantly, for tens of millions of Americans.
"
The new law immediately ends the national emergency and public health emergency first enacted during the Trump administration and continued through the Biden administration.
Former President Donald Trump first declared a national emergency over the virus on March 13, 2020, retroactive to March 1 of that year.
The declarations allowed for federal funding to be freed up to cities and states for things like testing and vaccination centers.
The law would also abruptly end Title 42, the pandemic-era rule that has blocked undocumented immigrants from crossing the southern border, citing public health reasons.
But the White House has said that policy is subject to a U.S. Supreme Court case, and it intends to wind down the program.
— Ed O'Keefe contributed to this report
Robotic neutralizing antibody testing system expands possibilities for accelerated sample testing
System opens the possibility to scale up testing rate from 15 tests per day to over 1,000
Resulting data can be used to calculate herd immunity against different strains of the COVID virus
Imagine if one test could tell you if you were protected from the latest COVID-19 variant.
An innovative robotic neutralizing antibody testing system developed by ABB Robotics and UTMB is helping to achieve this by enabling hundreds of tests to be conducted each day, with the resulting test data being used to assess individuals’ immunity against different strains of the virus.
A key challenge for medical researchers in fighting the spread of the COVID virus has been its continued mutation.
While vaccination programs have been in place in many countries worldwide, the mutation of the virus means that no single vaccine currently offers protection against every variant.
Consequently, even those who have had one or more vaccinations may not be fully protected, while those who have not been vaccinated at all are potentially vulnerable to any strain of the virus.
“The initial vaccinations against COVID were developed using genetic information from the original Wuhan strain of the virus,” explains Dr. Michael Laposata, professor and chairman of the department of Pathology at UTMB.
“While this vaccination worked well initially in containing the virus, subsequent mutations have led to multiple variations which can reduce its effectiveness and still cause people to fall ill.”
To counter this, the goal has been to develop a test that would enable researchers to quickly assess whether an individual has the right antibodies to protect against one or more strains of the virus.
Using this information, they could then make decisions about how to minimize their exposure to the virus, for example avoiding areas where new strains may be present.
Neutralizing antibody tests enable this by detecting whether a patient has developed the right neutralizing antibodies to protect their blood cells against the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.
To date, the manual nature of neutralizing antibody testing has been slow, with tests carried out at a rate of around 15 tests per day and results available in 24 hours.
The risk of infection during testing also means that tests must be performed in specialized laboratories protected to Bio Safety Level 3 (BSL3).
Testing transformed with robots
The automated neutralizing antibody test was developed by using the RobotStudio offline programming software to model, iterate and test different combinations of lab equipment and robot positions to develop the most effective working concept.
The robotic solution comprises of two application cells fitted with ABB IRB 1200 industrial robots and grippers, plus additional equipment including a robot controller and a variety of laboratory devices.
Together, the two cells carry out all sample handling, mixing and testing in a contained environment, eliminating the need for laboratory staff to be in contact with any potentially infectious substances.
As a result of this process, a working system was produced from inception into operation within just 18 months, greatly cutting the amount of time typically required for a project of this type.
“This project is a clear example of how robotics can increase speed and efficiency, while making work safer for the researchers involved,” says Daniel Navarro, managing director of Consumer Segments and Service Robotics at ABB.
“Working closely with UTMB, we combined our expertise on biology, lab process, automation and software to develop and deploy an automated robotic solution that can radically advance and inform our response to the COVID pandemic.
The aim of the automated neutralizing antibody test is to specifically detect a SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibody without cross-reaction with other infection, making this assay a gold standard for COVID-19 serological testing.
The resulting data will then be used both by the person being tested and by researchers to better understand immunity from vaccination or infection.
The data will also inform local policymakers’ decisions on how to minimize the risk of further infection, such as avoiding virus hotspots.
Using robots has transformed the rate of neutralizing antibody testing whilst also minimizing the risk of infection.
Currently operating at a rate of 400 to 500 tests per day, the robotic system could scale up to 1,000 tests if required.
In contrast to manual laboratory testing, which requires large numbers of highly trained staff, the automated system needs just one person to be present to ensure that the sampling systems are loaded and to supervise the cells.
“Expanding the rate of daily testing is key to building up a valuable bank of neutralizing antibody data that can be used to start assessing individual immunity profiles and shaping vaccination programmes,” says Dr Laposata.
“The automated system we’ve developed with ABB now enables us to achieve this, with the ability to scale up even further if we need to.”
The automated solution is the result of one and a half years of development, with UTMB working closely in partnership with ABB to find the best way of automating the antibody testing process.
With ABB and UTMB already having worked together previously, there was already a good relationship in place, which has grown further throughout the course of the automated antibody testing project.
“What we managed to achieve in this project within such a short space of is extraordinary—many multimillion-dollar companies take several years to create solutions like the one we’ve developed in a fraction of the time,” says Juan Garcia, director of Laboratory Services at UTMB.
“None of what we’ve achieved could have been done without ABB or any of the other parties involved in this project.
From the creation and simulation of a working concept in RobotStudio software through to delivering the physical automated testing cells that are now in use in our laboratory, this is the greatest experience of teamwork I have witnessed in 35 years in this business,” says Dr Laposata.
A further benefit of the automated system is its ability to be used for other types of virus testing.
“The ability of the cells to carry out high volume testing in a safe environment means they can be used for virtually any type of virus,” explains ABB’s Daniel Navarro.
“From ABB’s perspective, the issues involved are the same as automating any materials handling process – in this application, it’s just a case of bringing biology and chemistry together to achieve the required solution.”
The project is just one a of several projects worldwide where ABB robots are being used to help find ways to protect against COVID.
We know that people can experience a wide range of new, returning, or ongoing health problems after experiencing COVID-19.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) lists a range of post-COVID conditions on its website.
A study published in JAMA in April 2021 that looked at the long-term symptoms among healthcare workers who had recovered from mild COVID-19 found that the four most common lingering COVID-19 symptoms include loss of smell, loss of taste, lasting fatigue, and shortness of breath.
One symptom that does not make it on the CDC list or appear in research documenting lingering symptoms as of April of 2022 is the attention-grabbing "restless anal syndrome."
That is likely because there has been only one case of restless anal syndrome confirmed worldwide since the start of the pandemic.
Restless Anus Syndrome and COVID-19 History
In September 2021, a BMC Infectious Diseases case report described the case of a 77-year-old man who started noticing symptoms related to a constant need to move his bowels after recovering from COVID-19.
The case report detailed how the man, who lives in Japan, sought treatment for "deep anal discomfort" after spending 21 days in the hospital with COVID.
The man said the discomfort gave him an "essential urge to move" his bowels.
But, even when he did, he still didn't feel relief.
The case report said that the man's symptoms got worse when he was resting, felt better when he exercised, and got worse again in the evening.
He had a colonoscopy that detected hemorrhoids, but that didn't explain his symptoms.
Neurological tests found no issues with the reflexes of his tendons in his anus, nor did they uncover any problems with the sensation in his perineum (the area between the anus and genitals) and spinal cord.
Doctors dubbed his condition restless anus syndrome, linking his symptoms in the paper with restless legs syndrome—a disorder that causes uncomfortable or unpleasant sensations in the legs and an irresistible urge to move them, according to the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS).
The symptoms of restless legs syndrome are similar to what the man experienced in his anus.
With restless legs syndrome, a patient typically feels the urge to move in the late afternoon or evening, and symptoms are usually worse at night when someone is resting.
Symptoms can also happen when someone has been inactive and sitting for long periods of time.
Symptoms of COVID-19
The symptoms of COVID-19 are well-documented.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), people with COVID-19 have had a wide range of symptoms reported that include:
Fever or chills
Cough
Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
Fatigue
Muscle or body aches
Headache
New loss of taste or smell
Sore throat
Congestion or runny nose
Nausea or vomiting
Diarrhea
While the CDC's list doesn't include restless anus syndrome, it does point out that it does not include "all possible symptoms.
"
Should You Worry About Getting Restless Anus Syndrome?
It's easy to read about one man's case and panic that it will happen to you if you contract COVID-19.
But infectious disease expert Amesh A. Adalja, MD, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, told Health that's unlikely.
"I've personally never seen anything like this," said Dr. Adalja.
"Restless leg syndrome has been reported as a rare complication of COVID-19 in some case reports, and this is an even rarer variant."
As for why this might have happened, Dr. Adalja said that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to the nerves, "possibly causing dysfunction.
"
Dr. Adalja said that he "highly doubts" people will develop a complication like this from COVID-19.
But, said Dr. Adalja, you should "seek medical attention" if it happens to you.
As for the man, the case report said that he was prescribed 1.5 milligrams a day of the anxiety medication Clonazepam, which "resulted in the alleviation of restless anal discomfort."
This study sought to identify predictors of the severity of side effects after COVID-19 vaccines among young adult students at Taif University (TU).
Since the pandemic, several COVID-19 vaccines have been licensed [17], and the success of a launch often depends on people’s willingness to accept it considering the highlighted safety profile, taking into account the fact that the development of vaccines and the technology used utilized either mRNA technology or a virus belonging to the adenovirus family, genetically modified with a gene encoding a specific SARS-CoV-2 protein [26].
This study indicated that the severity of COVID-19 vaccine-related side effects depend on several factors, such as the COVID-19 vaccine type, gender, ABO blood groups, age, and general health status.
The study results suggested that both females and males experienced side effects that mostly started within 8 hours after vaccination, lasted between one and three days, and were mainly limited to pain at the injection site, headache, fatigue, and fever, while serious side effects were rare.
These results are consistent with what has been reported in the literature [27, 28].
In this study, we also found that both females and males reported side effects to the vaccine over the three doses, but females showed more side effects that were between moderate and severe than their male counterparts.
These findings are in agreement with previous international studies reporting fewer side effects in males, which could be attributed to psychological variation between genders [29, 30].
Our study did not find any correlation between the severity of side effects and chronic illnesses.
This observation could be attributed to the fact that the study participants were young and that most of them were free from chronic illnesses.
Interestingly, we found that being of blood group B, receiving AstraZeneca vaccine, and being in poor general health were significant predictors of the occurrence and severity of vaccine-related side effects.
The results were in partial disagreement with two local studies, one by Alessa et al., which included 612 surgeons, and one by Almalki et al., which included 1180 adult participants in the community across KSA, and neither study reported an association between the appearance or severity of COVID-19 vaccine-related side effects and blood type [7, 20].
However, both studies supported our finding that the severity of side effects was associated with gender and vaccine type.
It is worth noting that Alessa et al. and Almalki et al. included older and broader age groups than those in our study whereas we recruited students from Taif University who resided in the cities of Taif and Makkah, with about 95% of the participants in our study being younger than 25 years old.
Also, most of the students enrolled herein are from Taif and Makkah (~97%), and they differ in marital status, education level, and general health status whereas more than 40% of the participants in Almalki et al. study [20], were from other cities of Saudi Arabia and differ in demographic characteristics, which could lead to such conflicting findings in the two studies.
On the other hand, a history of COVID-19 infection was not a predictor of the occurrence or severity of COVID-19 vaccine-related side effects compared to non-infected participants.
These results are consistent with those Alessa et al.
[7] and Almalki et al.
[20] reported.
On the other hand, our results contradict what was reported by Beatty et al.
[30], who found that people with past COVID-19 history before vaccination had greater odds of developing adverse effects or more severe forms of adverse effects after COVID-19 vaccination.
Our study found that being of blood group B was a predictor of developing more severe forms of side effects after vaccination.
It is also possible to read such findings from the opposite perspective, saying: group A individuals were less susceptible to severe side effects of the vaccine.
To our knowledge, this was the first study to discern this association, compared to other local studies that included broader and older age groups
[7, 25], and to those conducted internationally.
In this regard, according to growing data, the ABO blood group system could be involved in the immuno-pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 infection, with blood group O people being less likely to test positive and group A and B individuals having both a higher sensitivity to infection and a tendency toward severe disease.
Also, subjects of blood group A may have unfavorable prognoses.
In addition, several observational studies, genome-wide association reports, and country-level meta-regression analyses all provide evidence of a link between ABO group and susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 infection, as reviewed elsewhere [31,32,33,34].
Though it was not evident in Almalki et al.’s study, the relationship our study found between blood group and severity of vaccine side effects might be linked to certain age groups (i.e., revealing a possible interaction between age and blood groups).
The role of age as a moderator for other variables effects is well known and widely hypothesized, tested, or proven in medical literature [28, 29].
However, we could not determine whether Almalki et al’s study did not find such a relationship because the relationship was not present at all or was present but could not be detected due to the small sample size.
The latter option is particularly possible because the former study included a wider range of variable ages, and the significance of the relationship is only detectable when the pattern differs more between different groups than within groups.
In our current study, the age variations are much smaller, with all participants being aged between 18 to 28.
This study has some limitations due to the nature of self-reporting and its cross-sectional design.
Participants may over- or underestimate their self-reported side effects.
There is evidence from literature supports an existence of a nocebo response, which can be defined as a negative reaction or symptom that is believed to be reported because of an individual’s expectation of developing negative events after receiving a medical intervention such as a drug or vaccine [35, 36].
However, it is to be noted that a large percentage of our participants did not report any side effects and the reported side effects were low in frequency in most cases, nullifying the presence of nocebo effect.
The cross-sectional design cannot assess the temporal relationships and prospective follow-up studies will be needed to confirm findings.
Also, we included only TU students, which may limit the generalizability of the study to others.
In addition, other factors that might affect the development and severity of the vaccine-related side effects, such as ethnicity, pregnancy, history of asthma at baseline, receiving an influenza shot in the previous year, and social status, were not addressed in the study.
This study provided real-world data about predictors of COVID-19 vaccine-related side effects across three brands of COVID-19 vaccines (AstraZeneca, Moderna, and Pfizer-BioNTech) in young, vaccinated people in KSA for the three doses.
Also, we were able to investigate predictors of COVID-19 vaccine-related side effects in a more focused special population as we included young participants who were between 18 and 26 years old to explore the age’s effect on the appearance and severity of COVID-19 vaccine-related side effects.
Future studies with larger sizes and more diverse population characteristics are needed to confirm the relationship between blood group and side effect severity, explore the mechanism therein, and test the age–blood group interaction we hypothesize.
Intelligence agencies do not believe the case of three workers from a laboratory in Wuhan, China, who became ill in 2019 can help shed light on whether the Covid-19 pandemic originated from an accidental lab leak, according to a report made public Friday.
The Office of the Director of National Intelligence released a long-awaited declassified report, which included spy agencies’ findings on the so-called lab leak theory, but the material is unlikely to satisfy many people who have been wrestling with the unanswered questions on the origins of the Covid outbreak.
The 10-page report said scientists at the Wuhan Institute of Virology did conduct research on coronaviruses, in some cases had inadequate safety measures and had genetically engineered coronaviruses.
But the intelligence agencies said they have found nothing that tells them that work at the laboratory caused the pandemic.
“The I.C. has no information, however, indicating that any W.I.V. genetic engineering work has involved SARS-CoV-2, a close progenitor, or a backbone virus that is closely related enough to have been the source of the pandemic,” the report said, referring to the intelligence agencies’ findings.
The prevalence of long-COVID in children and adolescents was 25.24%.
The five most prevalent clinical manifestations were mood symptoms (16.50%), fatigue (9.66%), sleep disorders (8.42%), headache (7.84%), and respiratory symptoms (7.62%).
It was only possible to perform meta-analyses of ORs comparing cases and controls for 13 symptoms, with a higher risk of persistent dyspnea, anosmia/ageusia, and/or fever.
Studies have shown that the pandemic has profoundly impacted society by affecting children’s development through isolation, poverty, food insecurity, loss of parents and caregivers, loss of time in education, and increased stress37.
COVID-19 pandemic has initiated an explosion of future mental illnesses38, affecting both society as a whole and those who recover from long-COVID.
The presence of these symptoms in the general population, regardless of COVID-19 status, has been coined long-Pandemic Syndrome20.
Interestingly, many of the symptoms identified in these meta-analyses associated to long-COVID, such as mood, fatigue, sleep disorders, orthostatic intolerance, decreased concentration, confusion, memory loss, balance problems, exercise intolerance, hyperhidrosis, blurred vision, body temperature dysregulation, dysfunction on heart, rate variability and palpitations, constipation or diarrhea, and dysphagia, are commonly present in dysautonomia39.
Dysautonomia is a dysfunction of the sympathetic and/or parasympathetic autonomic nervous system.
However, it remains unclear whether dysautonomia may be a direct result of the SARS-CoV-2 infection, interaction with other viruses, or immune-mediated processes such as cytokines, which are known mediators of the inflammatory response40,41,42,43.
Moreover, the constellation of symptoms because of long-COVID can vary from patient to patient, fluctuating in their frequency and severity44.
Like adults, the pediatric population’s risk factors associated with long-COVID are older age, female gender, severe COVID-19, overweight/obesity, comorbid allergic diseases, and other long-term co-morbidities.
Protective factors leading to milder severity and duration of COVID-19, and possibly also long-COVID in children, include fewer comorbidities, strong innate immune responses, reduced expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme-2
(ACE2) receptors, and active thymic function, which leads to the increased presence and decreased depletion of T cells.
Further protections include a range of environmental or non-inheritable factors such as vaccines, past infections, nutrition, and/or the gut microbiome19,26,28,36,45.
Concerning age, most of the studies did not discriminate between children (< 12-year-old) and adolescents.
Given that the risk increases with age, there is a need for future studies to stratify by age.
In addition, the evaluation of self-reporting symptoms can be significantly biased by age as younger children might not be able to express their emotional and functional status relevant to post-COVID-19 adequately.
Further studies targeting age groups are required.
The prevalence of symptoms is highly dependent on how much time has passed after having acute COVID-19.
The follow-up time in these meta-analyses varied between 1 and 13 months.
Even though most symptoms improve with time46, there is evidence in adult studies that suggests some symptoms can persist one year after COVID-19 diagnosis47.
It is important to understand which symptoms are associated with certain periods of time (e.g., 6 months, 12 months, 2 years).
The strength of this meta-analyses focuses on the large sample size48 which helps identify the signs and symptoms present after acute SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Further, there were some limitations such as the quality of the meta-analyses results depending on the quality of the studies included.
Table 3 contains a list of all the methodological aspects that future studies need to consider.
We can observe that all studies had a high probability of bias, including lack of standardized definitions, recall, selection, misclassification, nonresponse, and/or loss of follow-up.
Additionally, the included studies have the limitations inherited in all observational studies, including bias due to residual and unmeasured confounding, and a high level of heterogeneity.
To account for heterogeneity, we used a random-effects model49.
The differences between studies were likely due to differences in study designs, settings, populations, follow-up time, symptom ascertainment methods, inconsistent terminology, little details on stratification of pre-existing comorbidities, and prior receipt of COVID-19 therapeutics and vaccines.
Only four studies mentioned what percentage of the population was already vaccinated15,16,20,28 (Table 3).
It has been shown that vaccines reduce the risk of long-COVID in adults50.
More studies are needed to analyze the relationship between vaccines in children with long COVID.
In our analyses, we included 2 pre-publication articles that are still not peer-reviewed26,30.
The limitations of the study of Roessler et al.30 are inherited from all observational studies and are mentioned above.
However its strengths are that it includes a large population (n = 11,950), that physicians and psychotherapists validate the cases, and that they estimate the incidence rate ratios (IRR), controlling for age, sex, and prevalent medical conditions by applying propensity score matching.
They report that symptoms were statistically higher in the acute COVID-19 cohort (IRR = 1.30) than in the controls without COVID-19.
The study by Miller et al.26 included children participating in VirusWatch, a household cohort in England and Wales that recruited households via postcards, social media, and SMS that had as an objective to study acute COVID-19.
Long-COVID was defined as answering “YES” to the following question—“Have you presented any new symptoms that have lasted for four or more weeks even if these symptoms come and go and cannot be explained by something else?”.
Given the nature of the survey, it has a possibility of introducing bias to the results (recall bias, selection bias, misclassification bias, and nonresponse bias).
The study does not present the frequencies for each symptom, and therefore it was not included in the meta-analyses of each symptom.
We only included this study in the meta-analysis of overall long-COVID.
The authors estimated a prevalence of 4.6%, which, compared to the other studies, is underestimated.
Future prospective studies should include a control cohort and stratify and/or adjust their results by age, sex, race, severity of acute COVID-19 infection paired with clinical evaluation, vaccination status, preexisting medical conditions, and, if possible, SARS-CoV-2 variant.
Retrospective studies using large population-based databases with historical controls and secondary data sources (e.g., claims and medical records) should also be used.
The selection of controls will be difficult in the future because not all the cases are recorded in databases (e.g., home tests), tests can be false, negative, or positive, or children can be asymptomatic.
Future studies’ proposed control groups include a negative N protein antibody test without vaccination, a negative antibody test with vaccination, or historical cohorts that include children who have neither been vaccinated nor exposed to the virus.
Participants
The data for this study were obtained from a national cross-sectional survey of last responders.
The survey was distributed in July–September 2020 through 9 last responders associations (e.g., the National Funeral Directors Association, the National Association of Medical Examiners—the full list of associations is included in the acknowledgements section).
We asked executive directors or presidents of these associations to send an invitation to the survey to their membership.
This invitation letter included general information about the purpose of the survey.
Two reminder invitations were sent, each one-week part from the original invitation to encourage participation.
A link to the online survey was imbedded in the invite for those interested in participating.
Eligibility included being a last responder in the US, being over 18 years of age, and not having completed the survey previously.
The survey closed on September 30 2020.
Instrument
The survey instrument consisted of validated measures of wellbeing, stress, coping, and stigma; and items measuring COVID-19 experiences and perceptions, as well as socio-demographics.
The survey and study procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the University of Iowa.
The first page of the survey was an informed consent statement; continuing on to the survey indicated consent to participate.
Respondents could complete the survey from receipt of the invitation to participate until the survey was closed at the end of September 2020; 535 respondents provided sufficiently complete survey responses.
Last responders could be members of more than one of the associations that distributed the invitation letter.
Also, last responders who received the invitation were invited to share it with others who fit the eligibility criteria and were interested, even if outside of these associations.
For these two reasons, we are unable to calculate a response rate because we do not know the denominator.
Survey variables
We only describe here the survey variables used in the current analysis.
Socio-demographics, and Work Experience
Socio-demographic variables included sex, age, race/ethnicity, and educational level.
We also asked respondents if they had any pre-existing health conditions.
Our survey included the following variables related to their work experience: number of years employed as a last responder, and indicators corresponding to having had previous experience with infectious diseases, having had previous experience with mass fatalities, and having handled a suspected COVID-19 related death.
We asked about the State in which they worked.
Well-being (WHO-5, GAD-7)
Overall well-being was measured using the World Health Organization’s
Well-Being Index (WHO-5), responses range from 0 and 25 with higher values indicating better well-being [11].
Anxiety was measured using the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7), responses range between 0 and 21 with higher values indicating more anxiety.
Cut off points for minimal (0–4), mild (5–9), moderate (10–14), and severe (15–21) anxiety have been identified
[12].
Stress (Perceived Stress)
We used the 10-item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS)
[13].
PSS responses range between 0 and 40 with higher values indicating more stress.
Cut off points have been identified for low (0–13), moderate (14–26), and high (27–40) stress.
Coping (brief COPE)
We used the 28-item Brief-COPE questionnaire
[14], which includes 14 subscales which can be collapsed into two broader subscales: adaptive and maladaptive.
The adaptive coping subscale is the sum of subscales 1–8, and the maladaptive coping subscale is the sum of subscales 9–14
[14].
This grouping was verified through visual inspection of clear clustering patterns in a principal components analysis bi-plot.
Social support (FSSQ)
Social support was measured using the Functional Social Support Questionnaire (FSSQ)
[15].
FSSQ values range from 1 to 5, with higher values indicating greater amount of perceived social support.
Stigma
We used the Everyday Discrimination Scale as a measure of stigma
[16].
This scale includes 9 items related to experiences of discrimination as a result of some characteristic, we inquired about their experience with these items in relation to their occupation as a last responder.
Responses options range from never (1) to often (4).
We created a stigma score which was the average of the responses to the 9 items.
COVID-19 related survey items
We included several COVID-19 related questions.
These variables measured whether the respondent had COVID-19, whether a member of the respondent's’ family had COVID-19, whether COVID-19 affected the respondent’s life or job, whether the respondent had sufficient personal protective equipment (PPE), whether the respondent did not use PPE due to social pressure, and whether the respondent felt anxiety over PPE shortages.
The full survey is included as an Additional file.
Data analysis
A ridge regression model was fit for the outcome variables well-being, anxiety, stress, and coping.
Social support, stigma, and COVID-19 related survey questions were included as covariates in each model as well as socio-demographic variables.
Because a preliminary analysis revealed a highly positive correlation between worker's confidence in protecting themselves against COVID-19 and their confidence in protecting their family against COVID-19 (r = 0.75, p < 0.01), we only included the latter covariate.
In addition to the survey questions, in each outcome’s regression model we included excess mortality during the pandemic in the State in which the respondent worked, as a covariate.
This variable accounts for the fact that some last responders reside in the states that experienced a disproportionately higher death toll throughout the pandemic, while adjusting for between-state variation in reporting COVID-19 as cause of death.
The estimated observed and expected total counts of death for each state between the beginning of the pandemic, January 2020, and the date each person took the survey was obtained from the National Center for Health Statistics website.
The proportion increase in death was calculated as the difference between the observed and expected number of deaths divided by the expected.
The shrinkage parameter in the ridge regression was selected via grid-search over a range of values to minimize mean cross-validation error.
Inferential results were based on 95% bias-corrected and accelerated bootstrap confidence intervals.
Due to the large number of covariates, only those that have significant association with an outcome in each model are reported in the Results section.
We retained for our analyses all subjects who were missing 25% or less of the variables.
To handle the remaining missingness in the data, we used multiple imputation with 10 imputed datasets, and combined this with our bootstrap-based inference using the MI BOOT algorithm in Schomaker and Heumann (2018)
[17].
You're probably well aware that the COVID-19 vaccine typically comes with at least a few less-than-pleasant side effects such as pain at the injection site, fever, and fatigue.
However, feeling any discomfort at all isn't exactly how you want to spend the day after getting vaccinated.
To help, some pharmacies are offering up tips on what you can do before and after your COVID-19 shot to help reduce symptoms.
RiteAid suggested people "eat a nutritious meal and hydrate" before their vaccine appointment to "potentially lessen any side effects."
CVS, too, urged people to "drink at least 16 ounces of water [one] hour before your appointment to help prevent side effects," in a reminder email before their vaccine appointments.
Getty Images
But how much of a role does hydration—especially hydration from drinking water—play in alleviating discomfort from getting a COVID-19 vaccine?
Here's more about the link between the two.
What Does It Mean To Be Hydrated—And Why Is It Important?
Being hydrated means that you have enough fluid in your body for the different systems to work properly so that you don't end up dealing with the effects of dehydration.
"Good hydration is great for general bodily function," said William Schaffner, MD, an infectious disease specialist and professor at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine.
Specifically, drinking enough water helps your heart pump blood easily and your muscles work efficiently.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also stated that water helps in the following ways:
Maintaining a normal temperature
Providing joint lubrication and cushion
Protecting sensitive tissues, such as your spinal cord
Ridding the body of wastes through methods such as perspiration
Furthermore, proper hydration varies from person to person and can depend on health conditions (e.g., diabetes or heart disease), if a person sweats more than usual, or if a person has been prescribed diuretics, which are medications that cause the body to lose fluids.
So, Can Being Hydrated Lessen Side Effects Following a COVID-19 Vaccine or Booster?
Dr. Schaffner explained that "…there's no specific data to suggest that drinking 16 ounces of water or anything else will, in any way, enhance your immune system or specifically ameliorate side effects."
But staying hydrated isn't usually a bad thing in any situation.
The CDC recommends that those who get the vaccine stay well hydrated after the vaccine if they end up developing a fever as a side effect.
But they don't specifically advise people to drink a certain amount of water either before or after the vaccine to help prevent side effects.
CVS, however, does suggest drinking water before your vaccine for a specific reason: to help decrease the chances of a person fainting while getting the shot.
"We added the recommendation to drink water to our vaccination appointment reminder emails in April due to some incidences of fainting we observed during the administration of a COVID-19 vaccine," said CVS spokesperson Matt Blanchette.
"Increasing intravascular volume by hydrating can help prevent a vasovagal syncope
[loss of consciousness] event that can lead to fainting.
The CDC has also identified fainting after immunization as a concern.
"
Specifically, the CDC says that "giving patients a beverage, a snack, or some reassurance about the procedure has been shown to prevent some fainting" but adds that "studies are being done to look more into these strategies.
"
"People are more likely to faint when they're dehydrated," said infectious disease expert Amesh A. Adalja, MD, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security.
And though Dr. Adalja insisted that his thought on fainting and dehydration was purely speculation on his part, Dr. Schaffner agreed.
"It's possible that, if you were better hydrated, you'd be less likely to feel woozy," Dr. Schaffner added.
Past that, water isn't terribly likely to help prevent side effects, per se.
What Else To Know About Being Hydrated Before and After Vaccinations
Still, while water likely won't be a preventative method for any post-COVID-19 vaccine side effects, it may make you feel better in general—and that may translate into feeling a bit better if you do happen to develop side effects.
"It's just ideal to be well hydrated when getting a vaccine in terms of how one feels post-vaccine," Dr. Adalja said.
If you happen to get the vaccine while you're dehydrated, for example, "you will feel worse and possibly get more dehydrated," Dr. Adalja added.
Thomas Russo, MD, professor and chief of infectious disease at the University at Buffalo, agreed.
"It makes sense that you'd want to be well hydrated if you developed symptoms like a fever," Dr. Russo said, adding that dehydration can also "exacerbate a headache."
Still, Dr. Russo stressed that "there is no data to support that this will help with the COVID-19 vaccine.
"
A Quick Review
There is no evidence to back up the claim that staying hydrated will lessen the side effects of a COVID-19 vaccine shot or booster.
But staying hydrated, in general, is important for your body.
For example, the experts interviewed speculated that proper hydration might prevent you from fainting after a vaccine, or it can help with side effects like fever.
Regardless, Dr. Russo said drinking a good amount of water before your vaccine "can't hurt"—so there's really no reason not to down a glass before your shot, just in case.
Globalization is changing and it is affecting where and how medicines are produced.
Great power competition between the United States and China has brought about a rise in economic nationalism and a corresponding decline in the liberal rules-based international order.
The resulting shift in economic focus from cost-efficiency to security, resilience, and risk management has fundamentally altered supply chains and trading relationships.
The media has focused disproportionately on changes in the production of semiconductors and goods that are or could be capable of military use, but the manufacture of medicines is also undergoing a transformation.
Both the United States and European Union are actively seeking to ensure medical supply security.
For instance, early in the COVID-19 pandemic, the United States issued an executive order to accelerate domestic manufacturing and address supply chain vulnerabilities of essential medicines.
More recently, President Joe Biden announced funding for a biotechnology and biomanufacturing initiative.
For its part, the European Union recently broadened the scope of national security-related measures, and several member states have proposed a Critical Medicines Act to mirror the European CHIPS Act and Critical Raw Materials Act.
COVID led many countries to reevaluate their dependencies for critical goods and services
Several related factors have driven this shift to medical supply security.
The COVID-19 pandemic exposed vulnerabilities in global supply chains, leading many countries to reevaluate their dependencies for critical goods and services.
American perceptions of China have also shifted from a benign manufacturing base to a strategic competitor.
Globalization once meant the pursuit of cost-efficiency by extending networks of investment and production to harness the comparative advantages of different geographies—but a consensus is growing that overreliance on a potential geopolitical rival for critical supplies is not in the national interest.
Moreover, reflecting a growing trend of promoting manufacturing and industrial policy, the United States and European Union are plying the pharmaceutical sector to invest in new production facilities and increase employment.
For instance, President Biden pledged $2 billion over five years to increase domestic production of pharmaceuticals, from key starting materials and active pharmaceutical ingredients to finished dosage forms, which he said would “create good jobs and strengthen supply chains.”
If successful, this would mark a large shift from America’s current focus on packaging and filling.
Officials unload boxes containing vials of COVISHIELD, manufactured by Serum Institute of India, after a consignment arrived from Pune outside a storage center in Ahmed, India, on January 12, 2021.
REUTERS/Amit Dave
Unpacking Global Supply Chains
Despite the burgeoning interest in it, the domestic production of medicines is not without challenges.
First is that pharmaceutical supply chains are now exceptionally complex, involving numerous countries at different stages of production.
Production dynamics are also well entrenched and may only be altered with significant subsidies or tariffs.
Bringing the entire supply chain into Europe, for example, may neither be feasible nor efficient, particularly given the cost advantages in countries such as China and India.
Until the mid-1990s, the West and Japan produced 90 percent of the world’s active pharmaceutical ingredients.
In the 2000s, as globalization quickened, companies reduced manufacturing costs by sourcing ingredients from China and generic medicines from India.
Acknowledging the industry’s eastward shift, the Chinese government passed legislation and enacted regulations to further promote it, including the 2005 Administrative Measures for Drug Registration.
Beijing continues to recognize the economic importance of the active pharmaceutical ingredients industry, as indicated by a November 2021 statement from China’s National Development and Reform Commission emphasizing the long-term strategic advantages they confer in the global marketplace.
Risk of Market Distortion
A number of European countries are seeking to shift supply chains toward Europe, support domestic pharmaceutical industries, and foster the production of certain essential drugs, and the European Commission is likely to act on the proposal.
The passage of a Critical Medicines Act could distort the global market in a number of ways.
The primary risk is that other countries will provide their own subsidies to attract domestic production, leading to the fragmentation of supply chains, reducing efficiencies, and shifting costs to governments.
Such intervention could affect global prices and threaten the viability of smaller, independent manufacturers and those located in countries where governments are not providing inducements or price supports.
Another risk is that countries will invoke national security as a smokescreen for their genuine motives of protectionism, shifting production from competitive countries to U.S. and EU manufacturers.
This might violate the World Trade Organization’s (WTO) agreement on subsidies, should it include a financial contribution that provides a benefit and impacts competition.
Problems associated with pharmaceutical distribution will not be resolved if each country prioritizes production for its domestic supply
The Principle of Shared Responsibility in the Pandemic Treaty: Implications and Challenges
The need for a coordinated global approach to ensure equal access to life-saving vaccines and treatments is urgent.
During the pandemic, inequality in worldwide access to COVID-19 vaccines was on stark display.
The problems associated with pharmaceutical distribution will not be resolved if each country prioritizes production for its domestic supply.
A draft global pandemic treaty being negotiated at the World Health Organization incorporates a principle rooted in international environmental law known as “common but differentiated responsibilities and capabilities.”
The principle recognizes that all nations are obligated to tackle global issues such as climate change or pandemics but that their capacities to do so vary substantially.
In pharmaceuticals, this principle recognizes that the world shares responsibility to ensure everyone has access to crucial medications, but nations differ significantly in their ability to manufacture medicines or import supplies.
The draft treaty recommends establishing “strategic stockpiles” of pandemic response items at regional and national levels.
The proposal suggests that international hubs and regional staging areas could streamline the supply chain, facilitated by multilateral and regional purchasing mechanisms.
Application of the principle faces several challenges.
Some developed nations argue that the principle is relatively unknown within global health law and could be ineffective in addressing public health emergencies.
In contrast, developing countries contend that a worldwide health crisis is a shared threat, just like a climate emergency.
Proponents also point out that the principle can be traced to other treaties, such as the “special and differential treatment” provisions in the WTO agreements and Articles 203 and 278 of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Moving Forward
Whether for good or ill, countries are shifting their supply chains for medical supplies and treatments towards greater self-sufficiency and resilience.
This shift could enhance public health preparedness during crises but may also disrupt global market dynamics and inflate costs.
The pandemic treaty under negotiation could help by enhancing the capacity of the World Health Organization (WHO) to oversee and coordinate international health efforts.
But it’s unclear whether WHO is up to the challenge.
A worker performs a quality check in Sinovac Biotech's packaging facility, developing an experimental COVID vaccine, during a government-organized media tour in Beijing, China, on September 24, 2020.
REUTERS/Thomas Peter
AUTHORS’ NOTE:
This research is supported by the Hong Kong RGC Senior Research Fellow Scheme 2022/23 for a project entitled: Access to Vaccines in a Post-COVID-19 World:
Sustainable Legal and Policy Options (Project No. SRFS2223-4H01).
The views expressed in this publication do not necessarily represent the views of others involved in the project.
Bryan Mercurio is Simon F.S. Li Professor of Law at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Ronald Tundang is a PhD Candidate at The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
The Marine Corps on Sept. 21, 2021, ordered its active-duty troops to get vaccinated within 90 days or risk prosecution for disobeying an order.
(Anna Nolte/U.S. Air Force)
Stars and Stripes is making stories on the coronavirus pandemic available free of charge.
See more stories here.
Sign up for our daily coronavirus newsletter here.
Please support our journalism with a subscription.
MARINE CORPS AIR STATION IWAKUNI, Japan — A Marine in Japan is awaiting court-martial in August on charges she said arose from her refusal to accept the COVID-19 vaccine.
Lance Cpl.
Catherine Arnett, 24, declined the vaccines on the basis they are produced using stem cell lines that descend from aborted fetuses, she told Stars and Stripes on July 1.
Her request for a religious exemption, she said, was denied by the Marine Corps and again on appeal.
“I believe that I’m protected from not having to get a vaccine if it contradicts my moral conscience or has components of it that now goes against my religious tenets,” she said.
Her trial is scheduled Aug. 3-4 at Marine Corps Air Station Iwakuni about 25 miles from Hiroshima, according to the court docket.
The Marine Corps charged Arnett with violating articles 92 and 87 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice.
Article 92 alleges failure to obey an order; article 87 alleges missing a movement.
Arnett said she’s being prosecuted for refusing to exit the Marine Corps based on her unwillingness to get the COVID-19 vaccine.
Neither the Staff Judge Advocate’s office at MCAS Iwakuni nor a base spokesman had responded by Friday to requests for information Wednesday about Arnett’s case.
Lance Cpl.
Catherine Arnett, 24, declined the vaccines on the basis they are produced using stem cell lines that descend from aborted fetuses.
Her request for a religious exemption, she said, was denied by the Marine Corps and again on appeal.
(Catherine Arnett)
Arnett said she was born in St. Louis but moved to Forth Worth, Texas, at age 4 and enlisted in the Corps at age 20 in 2018.
She said the Marines formally charged her on May 23.
“I was raised Catholic
and then I strayed from the faith for a little while, didn’t really practice, wasn’t really interested,” she said.
“And then this whole COVID thing, I kind of had a reawakening to the faith, I suppose, because the faith stands for, you know, obliging your conscience.”
Arnett said she’s been at Iwakuni since May 2019, first with Marine Air Logistics Squadron 12, then with Marine Aerial Refueler Transport Squadron 152 for 2½ years.
She’s now back with the logistics squadron while she awaits her court-martial.
“I like helping Marines but whenever it comes to these, what I consider unlawful and baseless proceedings that followed after the religious accommodation request, I’m just a little bit jaded,” she said.
Pharmaceutical companies Pfizer BioNTech and Moderna used fetal cell lines to test their vaccines; Johnson & Johnson used fetal cell lines to develop its vaccine, according to UCLAHealth.org.
None of the vaccines contain aborted fetal cells.
Fetal cell lines are grown in laboratories and started with cells from abortions in the 1970s and ‘80s, according to the website.
Today’s lines are thousands of generations removed from the original fetal tissue.
The Vatican in a statement in September 2020 said getting vaccinated “does not constitute formal cooperation with the abortion.”
The document accepts that some people may nonetheless refuse the vaccines out of conscience, but they should “do their utmost to avoid… becoming vehicles for the transmission of the infectious agent.”
Arnett said she believes the Vatican declaration is Pope Francis’ own opinion and does not stand as church doctrine; “therefore I have every right to object to it and reject Pope Francis’ erroneous and invalid opinions.”
Several cases are making their way through federal courts that challenge the military’s stand on religious objections to COVID-19 vaccines.
Federal judges have paused efforts by the Air Force and Navy to discharge or discipline service members while two cases brought by those service members make their way through the courts.
The Marine Corps on Sept. 21 ordered its active-duty troops to get vaccinated within 90 days or risk prosecution for disobeying an order.
By July 6, the Corps had discharged 3,069 Marines for refusing the vaccine, the most of any service, according to a monthly update.
The Marines had approved only seven of 3,733 requests it received for religious exceptions, according to the Corps’ update in July.
Another 602 administrative or medical exemptions were approved.
By comparison, the Air Force by July 12 had approved 104 religious exemptions and rejected 6,803 with another 2,847 pending.
It had “administratively separated” 834 airmen for refusing the vaccines.
The Army had discharged 1,037 soldiers for refusing the COVID-19 vaccine, according to an Army statement June 21.
Another 3,464 troops were reprimanded for refusing the vaccination order.
The Navy has discharged 1,229 sailors for refusing the COVID-19 vaccine, according to the Navy’s June 22 update, its most recent.
The Navy has approved none of the 3,368 active duty and 867 Reserve requests for a religious accommodation it has received, according to Holland & Knight, a Tampa, Fla., law firm, that tracks federal cases online.
We estimated the prevalence of anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies for the S1 subunit of the spike glycoprotein and factors potentially associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection 6 months after the beginning of the first wave of COVID-19 in Belém, Pará, Brazil.
To our knowledge, this is one of the first seroepidemiological studies describing the prevalence of anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in the city of Belém.
The seroprevalence of anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies varies based on geographic region, study population, sampling time, laboratory method and COVID-19 incidence at the sampling site.
In Brazil, the prevalence of antibodies was highly heterogeneous when considering the five regions of the country, with the North and Northeast regions clearly having the highest seroprevalence rates, which were strongly associated with low socioeconomic status12,13.
Two of the highest seroprevalence estimates in Brazil were reported in Manaus at 29.10% and in the capital of Maranhão, with an antibody prevalence of approximately 40.4% in the population14,15,16.
Our results indicate a seropositivity of 39.24% in the city of Belém.
We believe that the seroprevalence in Belém may be even higher than that observed when we consider our previous results of a follow-up of a post-COVID-19 cohort in which we found a 30% loss of anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies 3 months after COVID-19 diagnosis17.
The choice of serological test was a determining factor for the prevalence rate of antibodies found in this study because due to good sensitivity and specificity, the test allowed the detection of asymptomatic seropositive individuals who usually do not seek medical care or undergo diagnostic tests and are therefore underreported in official numbers.
According to the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, the population of the capital city of Belém is 1.5 million inhabitants18.
Based on our seroprevalence results, which indicated that 39% of participants had been exposed to SARS-CoV-2, the estimated number of infected individuals in the capital would be 585,000, which is 10 times higher than the number reported by the Municipal Department of Health as of December 30, 202019, as these reports are based only on cases of symptomatic individuals seeking diagnosis and treatment services.
We believe that the seroprevalence results observed in the present study are not influenced by possible false-positive or false-negative results, since a methodology with high sensitivity and specificity was used.
Our study failed to identify a significant difference between the sexes regarding the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection, which is similar to findings reported in other seroprevalence studies20,21.
The presence of comorbidities was not a predictor of positivity for anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies, which is similar to observations in another study22.
However, comorbidities may be associated with a high risk of serious complications and death due to COVID-1923,24.
The age group most exposed to the virus and with the highest seroprevalence rates was adults aged over 70 years, which is similar to observations in other studies25,26.
As home lockdown was voluntary, the recommendations for social lockdown may not have been adequately followed, suggesting exposure at the family level.
The antibody rate by age can be a useful tool to track vaccine prioritization for the population, as defined by the National Plan for the Operationalization of Vaccination against COVID-19 of the Brazilian Ministry of Health27.
Individuals who self-reported being mixed race have a high prevalence of antibodies and a high risk of viral infection because they represent the majority of the Brazilian population.
Our results demonstrate a robust association between socioeconomic conditions and the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection, with a higher risk for individuals with a high school education and with a family income less than or equal to one or two minimum wages—socioeconomic characteristics that are prevalent in low- and middle-income countries such as Brazil.
Family income was the most significant risk factor.
Families with incomes between three and five times the minimum wage were less likely to be infected than were families with lower incomes, which is similar to the rest of the country12,13,28.
Socioeconomic inequalities became even more evident with the pandemic.
We assume that social health differences contributed to these initial observations and resulted in differential exposure to the virus and differential vulnerability to infection, indicating the need for preparedness plans for vulnerable communities to ensure a rapid and coordinated response to protect these groups from future pandemics or crises at an early stage.
Regarding infection prevention measures, interestingly, we found that individuals who regularly used a mask and frequently engaged in hand hygiene had the highest seroprevalence rates.
Notably, our data suggest that the lack of information on proper handwashing techniques, proper mask use and mask efficiency explain the high prevalence of IgG anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in this population.
Our data indicate that direct contact with individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 increases the risk of infection, which is consistent with results reported in other studies29,30.
Our results indicate a relatively high seroprevalence of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection (37.5%) in the city of Belém, corroborating other studies conducted in Brazil16,31, which complicates disruption of the transmission cycle, since a high percentage of individuals who claimed to have had no symptoms of COVID-19 were seropositive, thus highlighting the possibility of silent transmission of the virus by asymptomatic individuals.
Mass testing is important for rapid identification of asymptomatic cases and isolation of infected individuals, with testing and monitoring of their contacts, to prevent the spread of the virus32.
Clinical symptoms such as fever, body aches, loss of smell, loss of taste, shortness of breath and fatigue are strongly associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection, with studies showing symptom profiles similar to those found in our population.
In March 2020, the first reports relating the loss of smell and/or taste with COVID-19 were published33,34.
The available data suggest a prevalence of loss of smell and/or taste ranging from 31 to 85% among patients with COVID-1933,34,35,36,37.
Our results support that otorhinolaryngological symptoms are prevalent among patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 infection because we observed a high prevalence of these symptoms in participants with mild or moderate infection and positive results for anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies.
In Belém, we observed that individuals aged 40–59 years had a higher risk of developing symptoms than younger people.
A retrospective cohort study found that most hospitalized patients with COVID-19 symptoms had a mean age of 54 years and that advanced age was a risk factor for death among adults38.
The effects of age on immune system function, the activity of T and B lymphocytes and excess production of pro-inflammatory cytokines influence the onset of symptoms owing to poor control of viral replication39.
Thus, the correlation between age and the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection or the risk of developing critical illness observed in this study may be essential information for planning health resources to ensure the sustainability of the system.
All countries are urged to make increasingly rapid decisions regarding socioeconomic issues and public health policies to contain the pandemic.
High-quality data, as presented here, are necessary to facilitate decision making.
This study provides important information about the high prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in the city of Belém and indicates that individuals with low socioeconomic status and/or little education are more susceptible to infection—a pattern commonly found in low-income countries.
We also discovered the impact of the proper use of prevention and control measures and suggest that preventive measures are essential to minimize symptomatic and asymptomatic transmission in the community.
Seroprevalence surveys will be needed to identify dynamic trends and monitor disparities to profile future transmission dynamics and formulate protective responses for vulnerable groups.
We understand that the present study has some limitations.
We encountered difficulties when obtaining samples due to the lockdown and social distancing decrees related to the pandemic, which may have led to a sample bias in the statistical analysis.
Nevertheless, our analyses have strengths.
The study population was representative of both sexes, all ages and different economic groups and races.
The serological test based on the S protein can detect past infections, including asymptomatic and recovered cases, providing better information on the prevalence of the disease in the population.
To date, this is one of the first epidemiological studies to investigate risk factors for SARS-CoV-2 infection in the city of Belém, northern Brazil.
All countries are urged to make increasingly rapid decisions regarding socioeconomic issues and public health policies to contain the epidemic.
We were able to estimate the high seroprevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in the first six months after the first wave of COVID-19 in the city of Belém and identify the factors that may be driving seropositivity and exposure to SARS-CoV-2 in this population.
These findings highlight the importance of serosurveillance for estimating the real impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, identifying trends in viral transmission and monitoring population disparities to profile future transmission dynamics and formulate protective responses for vulnerable groups.
In addition, these results may be essential for monitoring the evolution of the pandemic after easing social distancing measures and the implementation of a vaccination schedule in Brazil as a basis for other countries.
At the beginning of the pandemic, HRC Foundation released a brief in March 2020 highlighting the potentially elevated risk for COVID-19 faced by LGBTQ+ Americans — along with many communities around the globe — who will face unique challenges due to economic and health care situations.
“The Lives and Livelihoods of Many in the LGBTQ Community are at Risk Amidst COVID-19 Crisis” released in March 2020, found that an estimated 40% of employed LGBTQ+ adults were working in restaurants and food service, K-12 and higher education, or hospitals and retail - industries significantly impacted by the pandemic.
Additionally, LGBTQ+ people and families were more likely than the general population to live in poverty and lack access to adequate medical care, paid medical leave, and basic necessities.
As a result, LGBTQ+ people were hypothesized to be at a greater risk of negative economic consequences associated with the virus.
Somebody just coughed on you.
On a plane.
At a dinner party.
In a supermarket line.
If only there were a “morning after” nasal spray that could knock out respiratory viruses’ ability to colonize your nose and throat.
In a study publishing today in the print issue of Cell, Peter Jackson, PhD, a Stanford Medicine professor of pathology and of microbiology and immunology, and his colleagues brought that possibility closer to reality by pinpointing the routes that SARS-CoV-2, the COVID-19 virus, takes to enter and exit cells in our nasal cavity.
“Our upper airways are the launchpad not only for infection of our lungs but for transmission to others,” Jackson said.
Jackson shares senior authorship of the study — the first to describe COVID-19 nasal infection in molecular detail — with Raul Andino, PhD, professor of microbiology and immunology at UC San Francisco.
The lead authors are former Stanford Medicine postdoctoral scholar Chien-ting Wu, PhD, and graduate student Ran Cheng, along with UCSF postdoctoral scholars Peter Lidsky, PhD, and Yinghong Xiao, PhD.
A river runs through it
The nose and airway are lined with epithelial tissue consisting mainly of three cell types: basal cells, goblet cells and multiciliated cells, which make up about 80% of all cells in the nasal epithelium.
Multiciliated cells form a protective barrier to keep viruses from entering the airway.
Jackson and his colleagues zoomed in on two structures found on multiciliated epithelial cells: cilia and microvilli.
Although both are well known, neither structure has previously been implicated in how the virus enters or exits the cells lining the airway.
Cilia are spaghetti-like appendages sprouting from the outward-facing surfaces of various cells.
A single nasal epithelial cell may host as many as 400 of these whiplike strands on its nasal-cavity-facing surface, all continuously beating in harmony.
They’re topped by a thin layer of a protein called mucin — closely related to the key protein in mucus — and, atop that, a coat of mucus.
Mucin molecules can hook up with one another to form a mesh akin to an elastic, three-dimensional chain-link fence, preventing larger viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 from getting into upper-airway cells, Jackson said.
The mucus coat entraps viral particles, bacteria, environmental debris and cell-breakdown junk and keeps underlying cells moist.
Upper-airway epithelial cilia poke through this mucus layer, their synchronized beat generating a wave that pushes the mucus and its entrapped particles along, like a slow-moving river, to where it can be expectorated or, alternatively, swallowed and digested.
Another feature common to virtually all animal cells is microvilli, smaller spikes extending from the cell surface like little fingers.
Microvilli can grab and transport subcellular particles and vesicles.
You say goodbye, and I say hello
To see, close up, what happens during a nascent viral infection, Jackson and his associates used a sophisticated tissue culture method to generate what they call airway epithelial organoids, which mimic normal airways.
While lacking blood vessels and immune cells, these organoids otherwise fully recapitulate the architecture of the nasal epithelium, including an intact mucus-mucin layer and well-developed multiciliated cells.
When the omicron BA.4/BA.5 variants were circulating, Americans who received an updated COVID-19 vaccine were 14 times less likely to die than those who received no vaccine and five times less likely to die than those who received the original monovalent vaccine, according a study released today by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The updated vaccine particularly increased protection for people aged 65 and older, CDC said.
For best protection against severe illness and death, everyone aged 6 months and older should receive a bivalent booster dose at least two months after their COVID-19 primary series or last monovalent booster dose, CDC said.
In other news, CDC today released 2023 immunization schedules for children and adults, which include the COVID-19 primary vaccine series and links to the latest guidance on booster dose vaccination.
Wastewater surveillance served as an early warning system for outbreaks of COVID during the pandemic
Researchers are now expanding testing of human waste in sewers to look for monkeypox, flu and other illnesses
It’s a foul job, but can ultimately save lives, researchers say.
ANN ARBOR—The early morning sky has lightened to a soft-gray in downtown Ann Arbor.
Olivia Yancey notches a blue crowbar into a manhole cover, heaving it from its place with a thick metallic scrape and a cast-iron-against-asphalt thud.
Cockroaches skitter from the rim.
She and her coworkers are on the hunt.
The team is among a growing number of scientists and lab technicians conducting what they call PPE: “poo and pee epidemiology.”
Related:
When your work derives from foul liquid gurgling beneath a manhole cover, there’s a kind of weird humor that develops.
“It can get pretty awful in the hot summer.
You find ways to laugh,” said Yancey, 25, a senior laboratory technician.
For two years, wastewater surveillance crews in Michigan have been on the lookout for COVID.
But in recent months, their mission has broadened to include other diseases such as flu, monkeypox, norovirus, a leading cause of foodborne illness, and — in the coming weeks — polio.
Credit the coronavirus pandemic for wastewater’s growing role in tracking emerging threats to public health.
Two years ago, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention established the National Wastewater Surveillance System to monitor wastewater sites in communities across the nation for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
Michigan was among 37 states that received funds.
A sizable minority of people infected with COVID-19 will shed the virus’ genetic material in their stool, according to a 2020 analysis of several studies published in the Journal of the American Medical Association.
Wastewater surveillance, then, can serve as an early warning signal of the virus’ spread, often before an outbreak makes itself known through testing or a rise in hospitalizations.
Why did this happen?
Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading.
For more information you can review our Terms of Service and Cookie Policy.
A new omicron subvariant is spreading in the U.S., but experts are not yet sounding the alarm over the strain.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention added XBB.1.16 – referred to as “arcturus” – to its variant tracker last week, estimating that it was responsible for more than 7% of new infections.
The percentage is expected to increase in the coming weeks, possibly setting it up to become the next dominant coronavirus strain in the U.S.
But in the U.S, the majority of Americans have some level of protection against COVID-19 through previous infection, vaccination or both.
Coronavirus cases, hospitalizations and deaths are down, and the country for the first time avoided a winter surge.
With such high levels of protection, the new strain is not expected to lead to a major increase in coronavirus infection in the U.S.
“I think it's very possible that this will become the next dominant variant, but it's also important to realize that just because you have a new variant doesn't mean that you're going to have a new, big wave of infection,” says David Dowdy, an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
“XBB.1.5 became the dominant variant in the U.S. in February, just as cases were continuing to go down and have continued to go down ever since.
So just because we have a new variant doesn't mean that we need to be sounding alarm bells.”
Still, the strain is “worth keeping an eye on,” he says.
What Is Known About XBB.1.16?
The subvariant is a close relative to XBB.1.5, which is the current dominant strain in the U.S.
But the new strain is likely more transmissible than XBB.1.5 given its additional mutations.
The World Health Organization this week upgraded arcturus from its “variants under monitoring” list to a “variant of interest.”
It has been reported in 31 countries and could lead to an increase in infections, according to the group.
Cartoons on the Coronavirus View All 100 Images
“Due to its estimated growth advantage and immune escape characteristics, XBB.1.16 may spread globally and contribute to an increase in case incidence,” WHO stated in a report published Thursday.
“However, at present, there is no early signal of an increase in severity.”
The organization said it plans to publish a risk assessment of arcturus in the coming days.
The strain was first reported in January.
It has mostly been documented in India, which is seeing a significant increase in coronavirus infections.
Does Arcturus Come with New COVID-19 Symptoms?
There are increasing reports that XBB.1.16 appears to be linked to conjunctivitis, or pink eye, in kids and adolescents.
While it’s possible the strain is linked to more cases of pink eye, it should be noted that conjunctivitis has long been associated with COVID-19.
A 2020 study found that of more than 200 children hospitalized with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China, over 22% reported eye issues, including conjunctivitis.
When asked about the reports of increased pink eye, WHO’s Mike Ryan this week said that he was not aware of “any major shift” in COVID-19 symptoms for the arcturus variant.
Another WHO official, Abdirahman Mahamud, added that “these are known symptoms that already are part of COVID.”
Will Arcturus Lead to Another COVID-19 Surge?
Although the subvariant appears to be more transmissible than the current dominant strain in the U.S., that doesn’t necessarily mean the U.S. will see more coronavirus cases as XBB.1.16 increases.
Given that most Americans have either been infected or received a COVID-19 vaccine, the high level of protection in the population is expected to prevent another large surge.
“A big message here is this is not like a new delta or a new omicron,” Dowdy says.
“This is a slight modification on what's currently circulating.”
He also points out that the coronavirus cycles in the U.S. and India are not synchronized, so waves in one country don’t necessarily mean another surge will happen in the other country.
Not long after the rollout of coronavirus vaccines last year, women around the country began posting on social media about what they believed was a strange side effect: changes to their periods .
Now, new research shows that many of the complaints were valid.
A study of nearly 20,000 people around the world shows that getting vaccinated against covid can change the timing of the menstrual cycle.
Vaccinated people experienced, on average, about a one-day delay in getting their periods, compared with those who hadn’t been vaccinated.
Challenge
The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 threatened to reverse the hard-earned gains in access to schooling and improved learning in Ghana.
Schools in Ghana closed for 10 months, starting in March 2020, when the first cases of COVID-19 were detected in the country.
This situation affected an estimated 9.2 million students in kindergarten, primary, lower, and upper secondary schools, as well as the 0.5 million tertiary education students.
In addition, it impacted the 450,000 teachers in the public and private educational institutions.
In response to the pandemic, the Ministry of Education and the Ghana Education Service (GES) — the agency responsible for implementing policies to ensure that school-age Ghanaians receive an education — introduced remote and distance learning programs, including the distribution of learning packages to school children.
This response faced the additional challenge of variable access to communications technologies across geographic and socioeconomic status, particularly impacting children in poor and rural households.
Approach
The GALOP supported Ghana’s COVID-19 Coordinated Education Response Plan during the extended school closure, ensuring sanitization and safety of schools, while also working to build a resilient education system.
The project launched distance learning via TV, radio, and online channels.
It supported the distribution of printed materials to support home learning.
In addition, it provided for community-based, complementary basic education classes.
The project also helped to launch the Edmodo Learning Management System, which created a platform that enabled all schools, students, and teachers to connect remotely.
Furthermore, to support remedial and accelerated learning that accompanied the reopening of schools in early 2021, the project supported in-service teacher training for targeted instruction and rapid student assessment to over 70,000 teachers (41 percent of whom are women) in 10,000 beneficiary schools.
As the school shutdown was drawing to a close, the project supported back-to-school campaigns.
These included radio and TV messages by education managers and practitioners in various languages, encouraging students to return to school.
Results
The project worked in several ways to reduce learning losses caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, including by leveraging digital technologies, enabling safe school reopening, as well as supporting back-to-school campaigns.
The major results included:
More than 1,600 lessons were developed to students across the country using distance learning modules.
These lessons included 1,201 lessons for Ghana Learning TV, a virtual classroom produced by the Ghanaian government, with 975 video lessons uploaded to the Ghana Online Library.
Printed teaching and learning materials were distributed to 2.9 million children during the school closures to mitigate the effects of poor or limited access to TV, radio or other technologies between December 2020 and February 2021.
The Edmodo Learning Management System, which provides a platform for online learning and encourages communication between teachers, students, and parents, was launched during the National Education Week on November 5, 2020.
More than 35,000 students were registered in the Learning Management System.
As of August 2021, the system had a weekly usership of 540 individual users, 6,241 classes (teachers and classes), and 202 informal groups.
At the kindergarten, primary and higher secondary levels, more than 10,000 public and 6,000 private schools were registered on the Learning Management System.
At the higher secondary level, 630 public schools and 285 private schools were registered.
Devices pre-loaded with educational content were deployed to 3,000 students in special-needs schools located in various regions of Ghana.
To address the learning gap resulting from and exacerbated by the shutdown, training in providing targeted instruction was conducted for over 70,000 teachers between December 2020 and February 2021.
The project supported the launch of targeted instruction, rapid student assessments, and remedial education programs for 5,000 schools (covering about 5.8 million students).
When schools reopened in January 2021, close to 100 percent of all students who were previously in school returned to school, thus reflecting the success of the back-to-school campaigns.
The program implemented interventions to provide additional hand-washing facilities.
It also supported the drilling of 100 boreholes to provide access to clean water in selected basic schools in the program areas.
World Bank Group Contribution
The GALOP was funded by IDA in the amount of $150 million, as well as a Global Partnership for Education (GPE) Education Sector Plan Implementation Grant ($23.9 million).
The GALOP additional financing consisted of COVID-19 Accelerated Financing in the amount of $14.8 million from the GPE, as well as $25.5 million from the Ghana Education Outcomes Fund, originating from the Global Partnership for Results Based Approaches (GPRBA) Trust Fund.
The government is also contributing $4.5 million.
The COVID-19 Accelerated Financing specifically supported the strengthening of remote education service delivery, including distance learning; safe school reopening and reentry; and the strengthening of management to strengthen education sector resilience.
Partners
The GALOP was prepared with a joint team of representatives from the Ministry of Education, the GES, the Center for Distance Learning and Open Schooling, the National Teaching Council, and the Ghana Library Authority.
In addition, there is a strong partnership among key development partners in Ghana’s education sector, including the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United Kingdom's Foreign Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO), and the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA).
Weekly and bi-weekly meetings with the Ministry of Education, the GPE, and development partners during the COVID-19 pandemic allowed partners in the education sector to coordinate their support for the Government’s COVID-19 Coordinated Education Response Plan.
It also enable them to receive feedback from the Government about implementation issues and developments.
Looking Ahead
In future, there is a need to harmonize policies concerning the use of digital devices in basic education schools.
This would help to ensure an enabling policy environment, as well as the sustainability of distance education.
The World Bank is supporting the Government of Ghana in: (i) reviewing policies concerning technology use in schools; (ii) conducting rapid surveys concerning teacher and student accessibility to internet and digital technology; and (iii) developing an operational plan to expand internet connectivity to all basic education schools.
These activities are supported by Trust Funds, as well as pipeline operations, including the Ghana Digital Acceleration Project (P176126) approved in April 2022.
Page Content
At the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, students had their world turned upside down.
Schools closed their doors as the virus spread quickly through communities.
Since then, we have learned a lot.
One of the biggest lessons: students learn best in-person, and many are also exposed to vital relationships, resources, and other experiences they need to thrive at school.
This school year, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) is urging families to make attendance a priority for their child.
A recent federal study found that for all students, reading and math scores are lower this year than they were in 2020.
Scores were worst among students who were struggling before COVID.
Daily attendance can make a big impact on long-term success and good health.
Read on for ways to keep your child or teen healthy and in school.
Vaccines & boosters
The AAP recommends COVID vaccination for everyone 6 months of age and older.
Kids who are fully vaccinated are at a much lower risk of missing school due to being ill with COVID-19.
Fully vaccinated kids don’t have to spend more time away from learning, friendships, sports and other activities.
Remember that fully vaccinated people can still become infected and spread the virus to others, but less than if they were not vaccinated.
If your child or teen has recovered from COVID illness, they should still get the vaccine to reduce the risk of getting sick again.
Your child or teen should be up-to-date on all recommended vaccines, including flu, HPV, meningococcal, measles and other vaccines.
Routine childhood and adolescent immunizations can be given with COVID-19 vaccines or in the days before and after.
Getting caught up will avoid outbreaks of other illnesses that could keep your kids home from school.
See Back to School: How to Help Your Child Have a Healthy Year for more information.
Masks, testing & staying home when sick
Masks are still a good idea.
Although not required in many school districts, indoor masking is still beneficial.
Masks help stop the spread of COVID—and other infections like the common cold or the flu.
It is especially important to use well-fitting masks if your child is ineligible for the vaccine for medical reasons; immunocompromised; if a family member is at high risk; or there is a high rate of COVID in your community.
Masks can help protect kids with immune compromise or disabilities from getting COVID, so they won’t have to miss school.
Most children with medical conditions can wear face masks with practice, support and role-modeling by adults.
Ask your pediatrician if:
you need help choosing a mask or personal protective equipment that offers the best fit and comfort based on a child’s medical or developmental needs or
you have concerns that a mask cannot be worn and want to explore all options.
Planning for outbreaks.
Right now, COVID variants and other viruses are circulating.
Schools need to plan for outbreaks that may occur.
People who have symptoms or are at high risk should be tested, following Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines.
And if you get a negative result on an at-home COVID-19 antigen test, the Food and Drug Administration advises repeat testing.
This is because tests can sometimes show false-negative results.
COVID symptoms & what to do: ✅
If a child has COVID symptoms at school, they should be picked up right away so they can isolate.
✅
Keep your child home from school when they have symptoms so that others are not exposed.
✅
Follow the CDC isolation and precautions for details on when to get tested, how long to wear a mask and when to end isolation.
✅
If your child had COVID within the past 90 days, follow the specific testing recommendations from the CDC.
School-based support for students
Many families will be recovering from the impacts of the pandemic for years to come.
Here are some of the supports that families can access through school.
Resources for families affected by housing or food insecurity
Access to high-speed internet and devices to complete schoolwork
Support, testing and necessary accommodations for students with an Individualized Education Program (IEP) or chronic, high-risk medical conditions
Emotional and behavioral support and resources for students with anxiety, distress, suicidal thoughts and other needs
If your child needs support, do not hesitate to talk with your pediatrician and school staff (including school nurses).
They are there to help you explore options and connect your family with support and resources.
More information
The initial COVID-19 restrictions in March 2020 – particularly stay-at-home orders – put the brakes on driving for many Americans, resulting in fewer cars on the highways and dramatically fewer crashes.
But then a curious thing happened: Average speeds began to surge in urban areas previously known for traffic congestion, resulting in a 25% increase in severe crashes, according to recent research.
The study, co-authored by Jonathan E. Hughes, an associate economics professor who specializes in transportation and energy economics, analyzed detailed crash, speed and traffic flow data across California freeways in the first 11 weeks of the COVID-19 response.
Researchers found that during that period, highway driving decreased by approximately 22% and total crashes decreased by 49%.
Jonathan E. Hughes.
“But there was a counteracting effect,” Hughes said.
“In places where there was a lot of traffic congestion prior to COVID, reducing the number of cars on the road reduced congestion and made it possible to travel much faster.
Your speed was limited by the speed limit and how fast you were comfortable driving, not by the other drivers on the roadway.
What that means is, if you got into a crash under those conditions, it was more likely to be a severe crash.”
Using data from the California Department of Transportation and the California Highway Patrol, researchers found that average highway speeds increased by 2 to 3 mph across all counties in California, but they increased as much as 10 to 15 mph in some counties like San Francisco and Santa Clara that are well-known for congestion.
The share of severe crashes increased nearly 5 percentage points, or approximately 25%, between March 12, 2020, and May 31, 2020, the period studied.
Researchers call this bump the “speed effect,” and found that it is prominent in areas with high pre-existing levels of traffic congestion.
“There were fewer people driving and there were fewer crashes, but those crashes that occurred happened at much higher speeds and so fatalities increased,” Hughes said.
“If you add it up all over California during the first few months of the COVID period, fatalities went down.
But then as a few more people started driving and speeds remained high, that speed effect began to take over, such that the overall effect was no reduction in fatalities.”
The unique period in the early days of the COVID-19 response provided researchers with an opportunity to isolate and understand how government policies, congestion and speed may indirectly affect vehicle crashes and ultimately fatalities.
They point to National Highway Safety Administration data that more than 6 million motor vehicle crashes occur in the U.S. each year, resulting in some 30,000 deaths.
“It’s very difficult to tease apart the contributions of different factors, but during this period, it was almost like an experiment.
We’re going to take a whole bunch of cars off the road and see what happens.
That allowed us to isolate the separate effects of speed versus just more driving on highway fatalities,” Hughes said.
The study, the final version of which was published in April 2023 in Transportation Research Record, was co-authored by CU Boulder economics Professor Daniel Kaffine and independent researcher Leah Kaffine.
The data didn’t allow a look into the psychological and behavioral profiles of drivers during the initial COVID-19 period, but researchers were able to examine the demographics of drivers involved in crashes.
“What we found is that during COVID, drivers involved in crashes were more likely to be younger, more likely to be male – things the insurance literature has shown are predictors of a higher likelihood of accidents,” Hughes said.
He added that during COVID-19, the more risk-averse people may have stayed home more.
“I think it’s a little more nuanced than that, but the data doesn’t allow us to explore (this possible trend) that deeply because we only observe basic demographic information on the individuals involved in crashes.
Riskiness is much more difficult to measure,” he said.
However, the researchers were able to look at age distributions for single-car crashes.
They found an increase in fatalities across the spectrum among both younger and middle-aged drivers, which “suggests the increase in crash severity we document is not isolated to younger and potentially riskier drivers,” according to the paper.
Hughes said the study’s results have policy implications beyond COVID-19, as state and local policies that reduce congestion and increase highway speeds are likely to result in similar increases in crash severity.
“The big takeaway is looking at the things we do that increase driving but might also allow speeds to stay high will lead to more fatalities, and things we do to decrease driving but do not have that speed effect would tend to reduce fatalities,” Hughes said.
He emphasized that whether specific policies will increase or decrease the number of fatalities on the road depends on traffic patterns in specific areas.
“The key thing is this idea that if you’re someplace that’s congested already, then reducing the number of cars during COVID made it possible for people to drive a lot faster, and that was bad,” Hughes said.
“Whereas if you’re in a place that was not that congested, you just stayed home and it was a lot safer.
So interpreting our results, you have to do that through the lens of what traffic conditions look like where you are.”
New Supply of Covid-19 Therapies Arrives in Gaza
By ANERA
A fifth wave of Covid-19 has hit the Gaza Strip.
To make matters worse, there's a chronic shortage of medicines that makes it harder to provide proper treatment for patients in Gaza.
The continuing blockade of Gaza severely impacts the supply of drugs to fight the pandemic and other maladies.
To help ease the burden, Direct Relief has provided a new medical aid shipment of molnupiravir for Gaza, which Anera has delivered to Shifa Hospital, Gaza's principal medical center.
Molnupiravir is used to treat mild to moderate cases of Covid-19 in patients who are at risk for developing a more serious illness.
The treatment helps relieve symptoms and help prevent fatalities.
The shipment included 39,920 capsules, which the Ministry of Health needs for more developed protocols of antiviral drugs to combat Covid-19.
Dr. Kifah Toman is the director of the central pharmaceuticals department at the Ministry of Health.
“We're relieved and happy that the drug was delivered to Shifa Hospital and to pulmonologists,” he said.
The medicines are also available to other physicians as an optional treatment for Covid-19.
The Gaza physician said the dispensing of the drug depends on the age of the patient and the severity of the infection.
The chronic shortage of medicines in Gaza is a major challenge for health providers.
Dr. Toman stressed the importance of continuing to supply vital medicines to Gaza hospitals, especially those dealing with epidemics like Covid-19.
He added that treating some of the hospital’s patients requires medications often in short supply, including vitamins and intravenous medicines for nutrition.
Editor’s note: This article was originally published by Anera here.
Direct Relief’s donation of molnupiravir to Anera was made possible via a contribution from Merck & Co.
Since January 1, 2022, Direct Relief has provided Anera with nearly 9 million doses of medication totaling more than 75 tons to support their humanitarian efforts in Gaza and throughout the region.
The SARS-CoV-2 Omicron XBB.1.5 variant, a recombinant variant of Omicron BA.2.75 and BA.2.10, was first detected in New York City (NYC) in October 2022.
As of January 7, 2023, XBB.1.5 was the predominant variant in NYC, accounting for 81% of sequenced specimens; at that time, only 26% of sequenced specimens nationwide were XBB.1.5
(1).
In addition, in December 2022, only 5% of sequenced genomes in the rest of New York were XBB.1.5, suggesting that NYC was likely the epicenter of XBB.1.5’s emergence in the United States (2).
The World Health Organization has noted that XBB.1.5 does not carry any mutation known to be associated with a potential change in severity, such as the Delta spike mutation P681R; however, there are currently limited data available about disease severity in human populations (3).
Because NYC witnessed the emergence of XBB.1.5 before much of the United States, and the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH) routinely links whole genome sequencing and epidemiologic data, DOHMH is uniquely positioned to characterize this subvariant.
Although a higher percentage of patients infected with XBB.1.5, compared with those infected with a co-circulating variant, were younger, identified as racial and ethnic minorities, and lived in high-poverty neighborhoods, and a lower percentage had completed a primary COVID-19 vaccination series with ≥1 dose of monovalent vaccine booster, there was no evidence of a difference in disease severity.
SARS-CoV-2 specimens collected from NYC residents at five DOHMH COVID-19 Express laboratories, 190 outpatient clinics, and 11 emergency departments across all boroughs within the NYC municipal hospital system were sequenced at DOHMH’s Public Health Laboratory or the Pandemic Response Laboratory, which has operated in Manhattan since September 2020.
Sequenced isolates were matched to the DOHMH COVID-19 surveillance database (Maven, version 5.5.1; Consilience Software), Citywide Immunization Registry, health information exchanges, and e-Vitals Death Registry to identify demographic characteristics and previous SARS-CoV-2–positive test results, monovalent immunization history,* hospitalization status, and vital status, respectively.
Persons infected with XBB.1.5 (3,019) were compared with persons infected with BQ.1† (6,067) during November 1, 2022–January 4, 2023, because both variants were co-circulating in NYC starting in November 2022, and BQ.1 was the predominant variant in NYC when XBB.1.5 emerged.
Comparisons across categorical characteristics were made using Pearson chi-square or Fisher’s exact test; continuous variables were compared using the Kruskal-Wallis test.
Analyses were performed using SAS statistical software (SAS Enterprise Guide; version 7.1; SAS Institute).
This activity was reviewed by the NYC DOHMH Institutional Review Board and was determined to be public health surveillance and therefore not subject to human subjects review.
During November–December 2022, the percentage of sequenced SARS-CoV-2 isolates in NYC identified as XBB.1.5 increased eightfold, from 8% to 72%.
Compared with patients infected with BQ.1 (p<0.001), those with XBB.1.5 infections tended to be younger (median age = 41 years
[XBB.1.5] versus 44 years
[BQ.1]), Hispanic or Latino or non-Hispanic Black or African American (Black) (68.1% versus 61.5%), and residents of the Bronx, Brooklyn, or Queens (82.6% versus 76.1%); a higher percentage lived in high- or very high–poverty neighborhoods (43.2% versus 41.9%) (Table).
The percentage who had received a primary COVID-19 vaccination series and ≥1 dose of monovalent vaccine booster was lower among patients with XBB.1.5 infections (41.1%) than among those with BQ.1 infections (46.0%).
The percentages of XBB.1.5 and BQ.1 patients whose specimen was collected ≥90 days after a previous collection of a specimen with a SARS-CoV-2–positive test result, which could suggest possible reinfection, were similar (25.2% [XBB.1.5]; 25.4%
[BQ.1]).
No difference in the proportion of patients hospitalized or those who died was observed, suggesting no significant difference in disease severity.
Limitations of these data are that patients with sequencing results accounted for 4%–12% of laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 cases diagnosed in NYC in November and December 2022 (4); therefore, characteristics of persons with and without sequencing results might differ.
Although a higher percentage of patients with sequencing results, compared with those without sequencing results, were aged 18–64 years (74% versus 68%), resided in high- or very high–poverty neighborhoods (42% versus 37%) and in Brooklyn (35% versus 29%), identified as Black (28% versus 20%), and had a COVID-19 hospitalization (7% versus 6%), the percentage with COVID-19 deaths was the same (1%) among all patients with laboratory-confirmed cases, irrespective of sequencing status.
XBB.1.5 emerged rapidly in NYC during November–December 2022 and earlier than in the rest of the United States.
Preliminary findings from a sample of sequenced isolates in NYC do not suggest more severe disease among patients infected with XBB.1.5 compared with patients infected with BQ.1; however, these findings might change as more data on these outcomes accumulate.
Although a small proportion of laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 cases in NYC are sequenced, linked epidemiologic and genomic data provide a means to evaluate characteristics of emerging variants, including disease severity, that are important for rapid risk assessment (3).
Routine linkage of epidemiologic and sequencing data allows tracking of emerging variants and ongoing assessment of reinfection, infection after vaccination, and disease severity.
Data from millions of ZOE Health Study app contributors has shown that a sore throat can be a symptom of COVID-19.
Here’s how to spot it and what it feels like.
What is a sore throat like in COVID-19?
Sore throat is a well-known symptom of COVID-19 and an early sign of the disease.
People using the app have reported having a sore throat that feels similar to what you might experience during a cold, giving a ‘scratchy’ or irritated sensation.
COVID-related sore throats tend to be relatively mild and last no more than five days.
A very painful sore throat that lasts more than five days may be something else, such as a bacterial infection, so don’t be afraid to contact your GP if the problem persists.
It’s important to remember that sore throats are common and caused by lots of respiratory illnesses such as normal colds.
So although many people with COVID-19 experience sore throats, most people with a sore throat will not have COVID-19.
How has a sore throat changed over time as a symptom of COVID-19?
During the previous COVID waves, a sore throat has consistently been in the top five most common symptoms.
It has become increasingly prevalent with each new variant and is one of the most common symptoms to look out for.
Regardless of vaccination status, someone who catches the Omicron variant is significantly more likely to have a sore throat than someone who had an earlier variant.
How common are sore throats in COVID-19?
A sore throat is now a very common symptom of COVID-19 for all age groups.
On average, seven out of ten adults who are double or triple jabbed will get a sore throat with the Omicron variant.
When does a sore throat happen in COVID-19?
During all COVID waves, a sore throat has been an early symptom of the virus, usually appearing in the first week of illness and improving quite quickly.
It feels worse on the first day of infection but gets better on each following day.
On average, a sore throat could last five days.
If your sore throat is persisting beyond this, it’s unlikely to be COVID-19.
What other symptoms of COVID-19 are common alongside a sore throat?
We found that during the earlier waves, a sore throat was most likely to occur alongside many other symptoms of COVID-19.
People reported a sore throat with varying combinations of symptoms.
Earlier in the pandemic, we saw higher rates of hospitalisation, depending on someone’s age and sex, especially if they had multiple different symptoms of COVID-19 in the first week of being ill.
With Omicron and vaccines, we’re now seeing significantly fewer people getting a severe disease with fewer than two out of 100 people with COVID needing to go to hospital.
What should I do if I have a sore throat and think it might be COVID-19?
It’s vital that people know the current symptoms of COVID as restrictions are lifted and access to testing changes.
If you have a sore throat it could be COVID-19, especially if you have other cold-like symptoms.
Download the ZOE Health Study app to log your symptoms, and take a lateral flow or PCR test if you have access to one to confirm an infection.
Whether you have COVID-19 or any other bug, please be considerate by staying home when you’re ill and wearing a mask when you go out, to avoid spreading your germs to others who may be more vulnerable.
The NHS has detailed advice for how to soothe and treat a sore throat.
In addition, check out our tips on looking after yourself if you’re sick with COVID-19, monitoring your health at home and staying hydrated.
You should get urgent medical help if you have breathing problems, are suddenly confused, or your lips or face are turning blue.
Help science and keep logging.
SARS-CoV-2 infections of women in late pregnancy frequently spread to their placentas and led to inflammation, according to a study from investigators at Weill Cornell Medicine and NewYork-Presbyterian.
The findings suggest that further research is needed on the virus’s effects in pregnancy and underscore the current recommendation by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that pregnant women continue to take precautions, such as masking, social distancing and vaccination, to reduce their risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
In the study, published April 11 in iScience, the researchers found signs of SARS-Cov-2 infection, inflammation and tissue damage in 22 of the placentas from 52 mothers who tested positive for the virus at the time of delivery at NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center.
The researchers also determined in laboratory studies that more recent SARS-CoV-2 variants, including the Delta variant, were more likely to infect placental tissue than the original strain.
“The main message from these findings is that placental infection can happen with SARS-CoV-2 and can lead to severe inflammatory responses in the placenta—and that raises questions about the short- and long-term effects on newborns,” said co-senior author Dr. Heidi Stuhlmann, professor and acting chair of cell and developmental biology and of biochemistry and the Harvey Klein Professor of Biomedical Sciences at Weill Cornell Medicine.
The study was a collaboration that also included the laboratories of Dr. Robert Schwartz, associate professor of medicine in the Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, and Dr. Shuibing Chen, the Kilts Family Professor of Surgery, at Weill Cornell Medicine.
The co-first authors are Lissenya Argueta, a senior graduate student in the Stuhlmann lab, Dr. Lauretta Lacko, a postdoctoral associate in surgery in the Chen lab, and Dr. Yaron Bram, a research associate in medicine in the Schwartz lab.
Some viral infections in pregnancy are known to raise the risk of adverse birth outcomes and developmental disorders.
Placental inflammation due to infection is viewed as a possible mediator of these effects.
While studies show that pregnant people with covid are at greater risk of certain pregnancy complications, much is still unclear about SARS-CoV-2’s effects in pregnancy.
Recent large studies indicate that SARS-CoV-2 infected mothers with moderate or severe symptoms are more likely to experience adverse events during pregnancy and after birth, for example, preterm births, postpartum hemorrhage and an increased risk of stillbirth or early neonatal death.
However, transmission of the virus from infected mothers to their newborns appears to be extremely rare.
To shed light on these issues, the team studied the placenta—the organ that develops between fetus and mother to deliver nutrients, oxygen and hormones to the developing fetus—from a series of 52 pregnant women who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 at the time they delivered.
The researchers found that significant placental abnormalities were absent in four control placentas from uninfected mothers but were present in a majority of the placentas from infected mothers—33 of the 52 (64 percent) had potentially serious placental pathologies known as fetal vascular malperfusion, or maternal vascular malperfusion, which affect maternal blood flow to the fetus, or both.
In addition, although no newborn tested positive, 22 of the 52 placentas (42 percent) tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 genetic material.
Two of these placentas had very high levels of the Alpha variant virus: one was associated with stillbirth, the other with severely preterm birth necessitating extended intensive care.
The researchers’ examinations of the two most highly infected placentas revealed significant infiltration of maternal immune cells as well as signs of inflammatory damage to placental tissue—which likely contributed to the adverse birth outcomes.
Finally, the researchers showed in lab experiments that placental cells that are in contact with maternal blood can be infected with SARS-CoV-2.
They showed also that more recent variants of the virus including the Delta variant—the study concluded just before the Omicron wave—were generally better able to infect placental tissue, compared to the original virus.
The researchers have been following up with further studies, including of placentas infected during the Omicron wave.
“The evidence we have gathered so far supports the idea that newer variants are better not only at infecting mothers but also at infecting placentas,” Dr. Chen said.
The team hopes to conduct longer-term studies of health outcomes among children born to SARS-CoV-2 infected mothers.
“To resolve the question of long-term impacts, we’re going to need to set up large cohort studies that follows children born to mothers with SARS-CoV-2 for years,” said Dr. Schwartz, who is also a hepatologist at NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center.
Many Weill Cornell Medicine physicians and scientists maintain relationships and collaborate with external organizations to foster scientific innovation and provide expert guidance.
The institution makes these disclosures public to ensure transparency.
For this information, see profiles for Dr. Shuibing Chen and Dr. Robert Schwartz.
North Carolina's state of emergency giving extraordinary powers to state government to address the COVID-19 pandemic is ending Monday as Gov. Roy Cooper officially concluded it nearly 2 1/2 years after he entered his first order.
The Democratic governor announced last month that he would lift the emergency order Monday, citing provisions in the latest state budget bill he signed that would allow health care providers and regulators to keep responding robustly to the virus.
His termination order said the emergency ends late Monday night.
The executive orders issued during the emergency “protected public health and helped us save lives and livelihoods,” Cooper said in a news release.
"North Carolina is emerging even stronger than before and my administration will continue to work to protect the health and safety of our people.”
Cooper's initial emergency order, issued on March 10, 2020, and subsequent orders based on that declaration, led to public school closings, mask requirements, and restrictions on commerce and restaurants.
As the pandemic's intensity waned, nearly all of the restrictive statewide mandates were lifted by last summer, but the emergency order remained in place.
Cooper said early this year that the order was necessary in part to help get coronavirus vaccinations to the public and assist health care providers should cases surge.
Business owners, churches and others chafing under the 2020 restrictions that Cooper issued went to court to try to end restrictions.
Cooper won most of those legal battles and vetoed several measures in 2020 and 2021 from Republican legislators seeking to end specific restrictions or limit the governor's power to issue long-term emergency orders.
Some GOP lawmakers continued to complain into this year about why the governor wouldn't end the emergency as conditions improved.
But a two-year budget that Cooper agreed to accept last fall contains language requiring governors starting this January to receive support from a majority of Council of State members to expand an emergency declaration beyond 30 days.
The General Assembly would have to act for one to go beyond 60 days.
Among the provisions that Cooper's health department successfully sought this year that led to Monday's action is one giving the state health director authority through the end of 2023 to issue standing orders for COVID-19 vaccinations, tests or other treatments.
Health regulators also now have authority to waive certain provider rules or increase bed capacity at hospitals, adult care homes and elsewhere during an emergency.
"COVID-19 is still with us, and North Carolinians now have multiple ways to manage the virus, so it doesn’t manage us,” state Health and Human Services Secretary Kody Kinsley said.
State health officials have counted more than 25,700 COVID-19 deaths in North Carolina since March 2020, according to Kinsley's department.
The state had about 1,350 COVID-19 hospital admissions earlier this month, while about 77% of the state's adult population has received at least one vaccine dose, the agency said.
Strong Policies Help Korea Navigate Uncertain Times
Korea has recovered well from the pandemic, a testament to its strong economic fundamentals and appropriate policy responses.
Economic output has surpassed pre-crisis levels despite multiple waves of infection.
The recovery was supported by the effective containment of the pandemic, including rapid vaccination last year, and proactive economic policy support, which helped minimize economic scarring, sustain income growth, and maintain financial stability.
Given Korea’s high global integration, strong external demand also provided support to the recovery.
Before the war in Ukraine, Korea’s growth was expected to remain robust this year and next, with inflation projected to gradually return to target by next year, as reflected in the recent IMF report.
But significant uncertainties were already clouding the outlook, with downside risks arising mainly from pandemic-related disruptions to supply chains, geopolitical uncertainties, and rising interest rates in major advanced economies.
Moreover, Korea faced domestic downside risks linked to weakening economic activity from rising COVID-19 infections, elevated household debt and real estate prices, and rising inflation.
The effects of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and related sanctions have exacerbated concerns about stagflation risks.
Specifically, the increase in commodity prices, particularly of energy, has been fueling inflationary pressures even as the adverse impact of the war on trading partners and recent developments in China could significantly weigh on economic activity in Korea.
So far, however, Korea’s recovery appears relatively resilient.
Against this backdrop, policy normalization remains appropriate, given Korea’s relatively advanced recovery and rising inflation, but the pace should consider the fast-evolving global conditions.
In particular, the pace of monetary policy normalization should continue to be calibrated to ensure that inflation stabilizes at its target and expectations remain well-anchored.
Fiscal policy should be broadly neutral while continuing to provide targeted support for affected sectors and vulnerable households, as needed.
Macroprudential policies should continue to guard against systemic financial risks, notably to contain the buildup of vulnerabilities owing to a red-hot housing market and elevated levels of household debt.
As global risks abate, the policy focus should shift to structural reform priorities to reinvigorate potential growth and foster greater inclusion, including in the context of the Korean New Deal.
This requires recalibrating policies to support productivity growth and innovation.
It also demands providing transitory support amid reforms to address product, services, and labor market rigidities, and ensuring that Korea’s human capital remains a central pillar of the transformation process.
In this context, fiscal policy should be anchored in a medium-term framework that stabilizes public debt, considering the expected implications of demographics, structural transformation costs, and the potential need for additional fiscal support when necessary.
****
Martin Kaufman is Assistant Director in the IMF's Strategy, Policy and Review Department.
Krishna Srinivasan is a Deputy Director in the IMF's Asia-Pacific Department.
We asked, you answered: NPR readers share how they handled COVID on vacation
Enlarge this image Malaka Gharib/NPR Malaka Gharib/NPR
You went on a trip.
And you got COVID.
Now what?
That was the topic of our Coronavirus FAQ last week.
We asked people how they handled the situation.
Did they respect the guidance from the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention to quarantine and wait 10 days before flying?
Or did they travel anyway, even though they might infect others?
I've been in this dilemma myself.
And it seems like many other NPR readers have been, too.
We were flooded with nearly 5,000 responses via Instagram, Facebook, email and Twitter.
Many readers shared that they could not afford the added expenses of quarantine or couldn't get a week off from work, so they traveled while sick.
They warned that getting the antiviral pill Paxlovid or even a pulse oximeter could be a challenge in some countries.
And for those who were able to quarantine, many said they were frustrated that they had to rejigger or cancel their travel plans and face unexpected expenses.
Here's a sampling of readers' responses, edited for length and clarity.
'I felt terrible flying, but I did the best I could'
"I tested positive for COVID the last day of my trip about a month ago, and I honestly couldn't afford to stay in my destination at a hotel.
I felt terrible flying, but I did the best I could to not share my COVID.
I triple masked [with a] regular mask, N95 and cloth mask and isolated myself as much as I could at the airport and then chose a seat in the back of the plane by others who were masked.
I didn't drink anything on my flight and faced the window the whole time.
I know it's not ideal, but it was the best solution I had due to my personal circumstances!"
– Noelle
'It was a crazy adventure'
"On the day of a flight home, I woke up at 5 a.m. with worsening respiratory symptoms and congestion and
[I was] just feeling crummy.
Luckily, I had packed a rapid COVID test, so I took one thinking I was being overly cautious.
It was positive!
Within the next hour or so I called the rental car company to change my return time and location, checked out of my hotel and started the more than 14-hour drive from Denver back to Indianapolis.
I made 4 gas stops and went into gas stations twice while wearing an N95 mask.
I skipped stopping for meals and snacked on Goldfish crackers and candy.
I finally made it to the Indianapolis International Airport at midnight and left the rental car and drove my own car home.
Luckily my symptoms were not bad, but it was a crazy adventure."
– Emma Tillman
'It's your conscience you have to live with'
"My in-laws from Florida flew out to visit me and the family for a trip to the Tetons.
We all had a great time."
Then her father-in-law tested positive for COVID.
"So then started the awkward tension on what to do next.
I pulled up the CDC guidance saying they should not travel and reassess their symptoms before rescheduling their flight.
I did offer my input that it's irresponsible to fly when you know you have COVID.
This was met with downward gazes and loud sighs.
The truth also came out that they did not wear masks during their previous flights or in the airports even though we asked them to.
"
Her in-laws called the airline to ask if they could fly with COVID.
The response: "It's not recommended, but yes, you can fly and wear a mask.
"
"The in-laws asked: 'Will you be mad at us if we fly?'
We said yes, disappointed, but it's your conscience you have to live with, not ours."
– Name withheld
'We're broken up'
"My boyfriend was at a conference.
Then he was feeling sick and tested positive.
He consulted everyone for advice about flying home (everyone but me, because he knew I would say absolutely not).
Once he made his decision to fly home he texted me: "heading home."
To which I told him I was disappointed in him.
My disappointment led him to rent a car and drive home instead of flying.
Yay!
But he ghosted me, and then dumped me.
Boo!
We've since talked.
But yeah, we're broken up."
–Patty (last name withheld by request)
'That experience led us to hide our COVID status'
"Lodging managers WILL turn you away if you tell them you have COVID.
This happened to us the first day on a vacation abroad.
Some of us tested positive.
I wanted to be honest about our situation, so when we arrived, I immediately told the B&B owner that two of our party had tested positive that morning and that we would isolate in our rooms.
She scolded us for not canceling the reservation earlier and told us to leave immediately.
That experience led us to hide our COVID status and simply continue with our itinerary, isolating in the remaining two lodgings we had booked.
We feared that doing anything else would put us out on the street."
– Mary K. Holland
'COVID exposure ... basically sucks'
"Our family of 4 embarked on a trip to the Pacific Northwest.
Throughout our trip we wore KN95 masks everywhere (my sons even wore them outdoors), but hardly anyone else was wearing any masks.
"
The younger son tested positive – and the family had a trip planned to celebrate her mother's 75th birthday.
"Our plans included seeing a musical in San Francisco and a nice dinner celebration – cancelled, of course.
After an almost 4-hour drive, we met my folks masked, in the restaurant parking lot (the sick child stayed in the car).
I handed my mom her gifts while she gave me two boxes of COVID tests and we left, feeling heartbroken and sad.
"
"Stranded without a place to stay, we found a local hotel and booked 2 hotel rooms.
"The bottom line: COVID exposure still keeps you away from your loved ones, cancels celebrations, can be expensive and basically sucks."
– Stacie Bresler
'Lesson learned.
Wear your masks'
"My wife and I recently took our family on a driving tour of the National Parks of Zion, Bryce, Monument Valley and the Grand Canyon ending in Las Vegas.
The parks were very crowded, and we let our guard down by not wearing our masks.
My adult grandchild did wear hers when in confined situations.
In Las Vegas, my wife and I were positive and my granddaughter was negative.
We isolated away from her and immediately packed up and drove home.
We underestimated this infection by not wearing our masks when needed.
Lesson learned.
Wear your masks inside or around large masses of people, like parks.
Be especially aware of shuttle buses in these parks.
They are crammed full, with most people not wearing masks.
I wish we all would wear our masks when needed and not make it political."
-- Thomas McFadden
'It pays to consider worst-case scenarios'
"It's sooo tempting to assume things will work out for the best – because they often do.
But when they don't, it's a whole lot better if you've made some contingency plans.
Especially when traveling to less-developed destinations, it pays to consider worst-case scenarios and to plan accordingly."
--Steve McCall
'I felt like I was a little kid again'
"I finally made it to Australia to see my mom.
Hadn't seen her since 2019 because of COVID.
Made it to her house — and 4 days later we all got COVID.
We had to cancel a bunch of plans, but spent the days napping, watching movies and coloring.
I felt like I was a little kid again staying home sick with my mom."
-- Stephanie Rhone
Thank you to all who told us your personal stories.
For more callouts like these, stay in touch with NPR Goats and Soda by subscribing to our weekly newsletter.
Zero-Covid protests rock China, and Western markets
Protests across China over the country’s strict zero-Covid policies shook up global markets over worries that the authorities will take longer to reopen the world’s second-largest economy.
The visuals were jarring: Thousands took to the streets over the weekend in the biggest challenge to the authority of the Chinese Communist Party in years.
The market response was swift.
Exchanges in Shanghai and Hong Kong closed lower, as did those in Japan and Australia.
Investor jitters quickly spread west, with Europe down at the open and U.S. futures dropping.
Among the stocks to watch: Apple, which was down nearly 2 percent, as investors worry about the company’s iPhone production hubs in China.
Crude prices, meanwhile, fell to an 11-month prewar low.
Why are Chinese protesting?
The demonstrations started after 10 people died in a fire on Thursday in Urumqi, a city in Xinjiang where some residents have been under lockdown for more than 100 days.
Many Chinese blamed Covid restrictions, saying residents were unable to escape in time and rescue efforts were delayed.
(The authorities deny the allegations).
Anger erupted on social media and thousands took to the streets in multiple cities, including Shanghai, Wuhan and Chengdu, and on university campuses in Beijing, where students held blank sheets of paper to protest widening censorship.
Chinese people were told they were fighting the virus together, now some are disillusioned by the abrupt policy change.
As years of severe “zero-COVID” restrictions come to an abrupt halt in China, relations between the country’s rulers and the ruled are under strain.
People who once supported zero-COVID have been left wondering what the years of tough restrictions were for now that nearly all the policies put in place to protect people have been dropped and COVID-19 is running rampant through China’s population.
The surprise policy reversal by President Xi Jinping’s administration has also left some previously apolitical people feeling deeply embittered by their leaders in Beijing.
In China’s biggest city, Shanghai, 31-year-old Ming Li – who asked that her real name not be used – was among those who took to the streets at the end of November to commemorate people killed in an apartment block fire in the western Chinese city of Urumqi.
Those participating blamed strict lockdown policies for the victims being unable to escape the burning apartments and the vigils quickly morphed into street protests throughout urban China.
Demonstrators like Ming Li railed against the restrictions, which for nearly three years had defined life in China.
As the protests gained momentum at the end of last year, demands to do away with zero-COVID transformed into also doing away with the leaders who had enforced those policies, said Ming Li, who described to Al Jazeera the moment when the vigil became a full-blown anti-government protest.
She recounted how a man in the crowd of protesters shouted: “Xi Jinping!”.
Ming Li, along with everyone else nearby, responded with: “Step down!”
The man continued to shout, Ming Li said, and the crowd kept responding:
“Xi Jinping!”
“Step down!”
“Xi Jinping!”
“Step down!”
A month after the protests, Ming Li recalled how the demonstration and that chanting was the most intense experience of her life.
That public expression of dissent was also the most overt public display of defiance against the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) in more than a generation.
Ming Li described the protests as emerging from a mix of pent-up frustration, desperation and rage that was spontaneously released onto the Chinese streets.
“All that energy was channelled into a call,” she told Al Jazeera.
Those protest calls were “on behalf of all of those that not only wanted a change to the zero-COVID policy but a change to the top of the Chinese leadership as well”, she said.
As Ming Li and her fellow protesters in Shanghai were calling for Xi Jinping to step down, a 23-year-old, whom Al Jazeera will refer to as Chen Wu – joined protesters in Beijing to demand an end to the zero-COVID policy.
Chen Wu, however, did not go as far as the Shanghai protesters who called for Xi to step down.
“That is a very dangerous thing to call for in public in China, and I don’t think things would change if Xi Jinping steps down,” he explained.
“But I do think that the Communist Party should start to share some of their power with the people,” he said.
So, why did he join the protests against COVID-19 restrictions?
“I believe the policy was slowly destroying more lives than it was saving,” he explained.
“And since zero-COVID was promoted by the top leadership then our demand was directed at them.”
The November protests against zero-COVID, along with the anti-government messages that emerged, seemed to catch the Chinese leadership by complete surprise.
Less than two weeks later, the authorities announced the discontinuation of certain key elements of zero-COVID, beginning a process that has now seen most of the policy dismantled.
From apolitical to political
Despite their political demands, both Chen Wu and Ming Li described themselves as being largely apolitical until very recently.
For Ming Li, the turn to being political started with the severe restrictions placed on everyday life in Shanghai in 2022.
The city of 25 million people was locked down almost entirely in April to stymie an outbreak of the Omicron variant.
The mega-city stayed in a stifling lockdown for nearly two months.
During that time there were stories of forced quarantines, food shortages, separation of children and infants from their parents, and even suicides.
“It was a living nightmare,” Ming Li recalled.
“Before, I had never given political questions much thought but during the lockdown, I started to ask myself what kind of leadership would put its own people through such hell to fight a virus that much of the world had already moved beyond,” she said.
For Chen Wu, a bus crash in Guizhou Province in September was the turning point.
The bus was carrying 47 people to a quarantine centre when it overturned on the highway killing 27 of them.
“The accident convinced me that the Communist Party’s zero-COVID policy was killing people and needed to be ended,” he said.
A frayed social contract
It is often said that an unofficial social contract underpins the relationship between the ruling Communist Party and the Chinese people: The CCP guarantees security, stability and economic opportunities and in turn, the citizenry stays out of politics and lets the CCP rule uncontested.
That unspoken contract has been tarnished by the last year of COVID chaos as people’s lives and the Chinese economy took a significant hit.
There are also clear signs of dissatisfaction with authorities, especially since the zero-COVID reversal occurred so soon after the CCP’s 20th Congress in October, which championed the superiority of China’s COVID handling while centralising power in the hands of Xi and those of his close circle who had enforced the strict approach to the pandemic.
The hasty dismantling of zero-COVID has divided people, interviewees told Al Jazeera.
It has also divided people into the physically weak and the strong as the virus surges through the country.
What seems to unite all sides, though, is mutual confusion and frustration directed towards authorities over their handling of the pandemic.
Amid the turmoil, Xi, in a speech to mark the New Year called for unity in China’s new approach to combating COVID.
While people like Ming Li and Chen Wu see the end of the COVID measures as steps in the right direction, others are disillusioned by the sudden change.
A 46-year-old from Chengdu, referred to as Xiang Hou, was not fond of the ceaseless COVID restrictions either.
But he believed they served a greater good.
“Based on what I heard from the authorities, I thought we were fighting this virus together as a country by giving up some freedoms in order to stay safe so we could avoid all the COVID deaths that they had in Europe and America,” he told Al Jazeera.
As China eased and then dropped COVID restrictions, the messaging from authorities also changed.
It is no longer about China fighting the virus collectively by staying vigilant but about individuals being responsible for their own health.
Xiang Hou thinks the policy and rhetoric changed too quickly, which has left him confused and angry.
His parents are elderly and unvaccinated, and he is worried they might not make it through the COVID wave now sweeping through the country.
“I trusted my government to do the right thing but now I am in doubt,” he said.
But 42-year-old Ching Tsao, also a pseudonym, from Guangzhou said she has no doubt: She has lost all faith in the central government.
She had believed in the zero-COVID narrative and willingly gave up much of her social life, including travelling and visiting relatives, to protect the weak and old in Chinese society.
Her grandmother succumbed to the virus at the end of December.
“After all those sacrifices, the government still decided to open up in a very rushed way and now everyone is getting sick and so many are dying,” Ching Tsao said.
“So what were the years of suffering for if we’re all going to get the virus anyway?”
More ways to explore the data
In the classroom: If you’re using this story map in the classroom, capture your students’ understanding by answering the blue questions that appear in the story map on this fillable pdf worksheet.
This was designed for students in grades 7-12.
Anywhere on a virtual sphere: The story map can also be viewed on a virtual sphere in SOS Explorer, which is also available as a free mobile application.
Find it in the Apple App and Google Play Stores.
Visit a sphere: If you are interested in checking out a Science On a Sphere for yourself, see the SOS locations near you!
If you are an educator and have Science On a Sphere at your school or museum, this story map is available as a Live Program playlist.
See the SOS website for more information on using a Live Program with your iPad Remote.
In the earliest days of the Covid-19 pandemic, when the new coronavirus still appeared to be confined to China, public health authorities were divided over whether to declare the outbreak a global emergency.
That changed once it became clear that the virus was silently spreading farther and faster than anyone realized — fueled by transmission among contagious people who didn’t feel sick.
Some viruses, like the original SARS, can only be passed when a person is showing symptoms.
Others, like the flu, can be spread a day or two before symptoms appear.
Studies from the first (vaccine-free) year of the pandemic suggested that more than half the cases of Covid-19 were caused by infected people who didn’t have any symptoms when they passed on the virus.
Among these symptom-free spreaders, some later experienced fever, cough, and other symptoms, but about 40% never got so much as a sniffle.
advertisement
What makes people able to clear SARS-CoV-2 out of their systems before it gains a foothold has been one of the enduring mysteries of the pandemic.
Now, a group of scientists from the University of California, San Francisco, believes it has found an answer: It’s in their genes.
In a study published Wednesday in Nature, the team identified a mutation that increases a person’s chance of being asymptomatic by nearly tenfold.
“It’s just one of these natural lucky breaks,” said immunogeneticist Jill Hollenbach, who led the research.
Newsletters Sign up for Morning Rounds Your daily dose of news in health and medicine.
Please enter a valid email address.
Privacy Policy
Hollenbach’s UCSF lab focuses on human leukocyte antigen, or HLA — a molecule that helps the immune system surveil every cell of the human body and is critical during the earliest stages of infection.
HLA proteins are constantly grabbing bits of chopped-up proteins they find inside or around their cells and bringing them to the surface to display them to immune cells passing by.
advertisement
Most of the time, these proteins are just harmless bits of healthy cells.
Like a biometric scanner, the immune cells read this as “self” and ignore them.
But sometimes, HLA molecules hold up something unrecognizable — a piece of a bacterial protein or a part of a virus.
That should set off alarm bells in the immune system, mobilizing the production of antibodies and sending troops of T cells to storm the area.
But not all HLA molecules are created equal — some are better at grabbing different kinds of proteins than others.
And HLA genes are some of the most diverse in the human genome.
Hollenbach had a hunch that some of the variety in people’s immune responses to SARS-CoV-2 could be coming from their particular HLA.
To find out if that was true, she turned to the National Marrow Donor Program, the largest database of people who have had their HLA genes decoded, totaling around 13 million individuals.
(HLA genes are the ones that have to be matched for people receiving an organ or bone marrow transplant to not reject the foreign tissue.)
Hollenbach’s team was able to recruit about 30,000 people from that registry to be a part of The Covid-19 Citizen Science Study, a project launched by her UCSF colleagues Jeffrey Olgin, Mark Pletcher, and Gregory Marcus to track people’s Covid exposures, infections, and symptoms through a smartphone app.
From the time they began tracking this data until April 2021 — when vaccines became widely available — more than 13,000 tested positive.
Among that group, 10% remained completely symptom-free.
When Hollenbach’s team looked at what those individuals had in common, they found that about 1 in 5 shared a common mutation in their HLA gene, known as HLA-B*15:01.
That suggested this version of HLA was especially potent at clearing SARS-CoV-2.
To understand why, they tracked down frozen samples of T cells from individuals carrying the B*15:01 mutation — T cells that had been harvested long before the Covid-19 pandemic — and exposed them to SARS-CoV-2.
They saw that the majority of these T cells recognized the virus immediately.
Further experiments found the likely reason for that: This version of HLA is good at grabbing the bits of other coronaviruses — the ones that cause seasonal colds — that look the most like SARS-CoV-2.
So if you’ve got this HLA and you’ve been exposed to those viruses (which most people have), when SARS-Cov-2 shows up, your body doesn’t need time to make specifically targeted T cells to fight it off.
They’re already there.
“Individuals with this B*15:01 mutation who have these cross-reactive T cells seem to be particularly effective, very early in infection, at nuking — for lack of a better word — the virus before these folks experience any symptoms at all,” Hollenbach said.
Her team’s work did not address whether such individuals clear SARS-CoV-2 fast enough so as to not acquire the viral loads necessary to be contagious.
But Hollenbach is hopeful the discovery might aid efforts to design even more effective vaccines in the future.
“We now know some of the immunological characteristics for people to have this very favorable outcome.”
she said.
“They don’t prevent infection entirely, but not having symptoms is still a win health-wise.”
“Their approach is quite clever and the paper is very exciting,” said Jean-Laurent Casanova, who studies the genetics of viral resistance at Rockefeller University and was not involved in the new research.
The effect of the B*15:01 mutation was significant, especially when people had two copies, he said, “which gives weight to these important findings.”
He added that the explanation they provided still left some room for doubt, however, because in a perfect world the cryopreserved T cells from pre-Covid would have come from the same HLA-genotyped donors who participated in the UCSF study.
It’s a question he’s hoping his own group might be able to help answer in the coming months.
Casanova is one of the co-leaders of the COVID Human Genetic Effort, an international consortium that has collected and sequenced the genomes of thousands of individuals, many of whom seem to be completely resistant to SARS-CoV-2 infection.
He and his colleagues are in the process of analyzing their DNA to uncover rare variants that may be playing a role in preventing people who’ve had repeated exposures — health care workers, spouses of infected individuals — from ever testing positive for the virus.
Studying these so-called super-dodgers is just one aim.
They’re also investigating the genetic differences involved in the most severe cases of Covid pneumonia, neurological complications, and long Covid.
Previously, they have found individuals on the opposite end of the immunological luck spectrum.
In a paper published in 2021, the consortium discovered that in 10% of the most severe cases of Covid, people had preexisting autoantibodies that turned against some of the body’s key immune defenses, dooming their chances of fighting off the infection.
Casanova and his collaborators didn’t set out specifically to study silent spread — people who are infected but without symptoms.
But they are now in a position to go back to their cohort and look at their HLA genes to see how people with the B*15:01 mutation tended to fare in terms of infection and symptoms.
Depending on where you are traveling, you might be required to take a COVID-19 test before departure.
But, of course, this raises whether your insurance will reimburse you for the test.
So the short answer is: There’s no one-size-fits-all answer.
Whether or not your test will be covered will depend on your health insurance and how you are tested.
Let’s look at COVID-19 tests for travel, whether your tests will be reimbursed and tips for getting them covered.
COVID-19 tests for international travel
Although many international destinations have dropped requirements for COVID-19 test results for entry, many still maintain regulations for testing.
Therefore, the need for testing will vary depending on the country you’re entering.
For example, some may specify that testing occurs within the last 48 hours before entry.
Others may be laxer.
Happily, for travelers, U.S. government regulations have expanded access to free or reimbursed COVID-19 tests.
As a result, testing will cost nothing in many cases, even if you’re getting it done to travel.
One of the nation’s largest not-for-profit health care plans, Kaiser Permanente, allows its members to get a COVID-19 test without cost.
For example, testing is covered whether done on-site at a Kaiser facility or by submitting a reimbursement claim if you get tested elsewhere.
Meanwhile, community-based testing sites, such as health centers and select pharmacies, can provide low or no-cost testing to everyone, even the uninsured.
In addition, these sites may offer either PCR or rapid antigen tests or both.
Tips for getting your COVID tests covered
Paying out-of-pocket for COVID-19 tests can be expensive, especially if you need the results returned within a short amount of time.
However, even if your health insurance won't cover specific tests, there are still ways to ensure coverage.
Use a proctored at-home test
As of Jan. 15, 2022, health insurance companies must cover the cost of at-home COVID-19 tests.
In addition, to be eligible, tests must have an emergency use authorization by the Food and Drug Administration.
Presently, there are 50 different options from which to choose, most of which feature antigen testing.
Most self-taken antigen tests aren’t eligible for any travel-related testing; however, one kit — the BinaxNow COVID-19 Ag Card Home Test provided by Abbott — includes a proctored examination.
Testing will be done over a video call with a specialist for this exam.
In this case, your test results could become valid for travel use.
Note that there is a limit of eight free at-home tests per month per person.
See if you have credit card points to use
If you’re worried about the return time of the tests offered by your healthcare provider, you may instead want to opt for a faster option.
The cost of testing varies widely, as does the time it takes to get results.
For example, at Los Angeles International Airport, you can take a rapid PCR test and get results within 90 minutes.
The cost for this service is $199.
Although this likely won’t qualify as a travel expense covered by a credit card’s travel credit, you may still be able to redeem points to cover this test.
Certain credit cards, such as the Bank of America® Premium Rewards® credit card, allow you to redeem your points at a rate of 1 cent per point for any purchases.
In this case, you could redeem $199 worth of points to completely wipe out the cost of your COVID-19 test.
Find a free clinic
Some clinics may offer you no-cost COVID-19 tests, even with private healthcare insurance.
For example, CVS Pharmacy’s Minute Clinic provides free rapid antigen and PCR COVID-19 tests.
Results for these tests will generally be returned within one to two days.
This isn’t available at all CVS stores, so you’ll need to enter your information into the CVS website to identify suitable locations.
You can still take a test at community sites without paying out of pocket, even with insurance.
Check to make sure your travel destination accepts the type of test you’re taking as valid.
If you want your COVID test reimbursed
The U.S. has evolved a lot when it comes to COVID-19 testing.
Although not all health plans will cover all costs of COVID-19 testing, there are many workarounds when it comes to getting reimbursed.
Depending on your insurance, you may be able to schedule cost-free testing at your healthcare facility.
You may also be able to file a claim for reimbursement once the test is completed.
The global equity market’s exposure to the digital economy has nearly doubled since 2016, indicating a significant shift in alignment with this long-term trend.
The digital transformation was driven mainly by incumbent firms’ rising market values, with revenue from operational shifts contributing somewhat, but new market entrants contributing very little.
Disentangling the impact of a firm’s index weight and operations on thematic exposures can offer valuable insights as investors navigate the post-pandemic landscape and align their portfolios with structural trends.
Lockdowns and social distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic spurred consumers and companies alike to rapidly embrace digital technologies, accelerating progress that might otherwise have taken a decade to achieve.
Investors may now have greater exposure to the digital economy than they realize.
The question then arises: Can we measure the digital transformation within a firm?
If so, what are the implications for equity investors moving forward?
To explore these questions, we use a framework that attributes the changes in thematic exposures within an index.
A change in exposure can result from a change in a constituent firm’s size or shift in operations.
Our analysis is designed to help investors understand how their portfolios are positioned relative to long-term trends.
Global equities’ thematic exposures have grown
Since 2016, the global equity market’s exposure to several themes, or megatrends, has grown markedly.
Our previous work demonstrated how such exposures can help drive stock performance in a rapidly changing world.
Using the same framework, we see that global stocks, represented by the MSCI ACWI Investable Market Index (IMI), have substantially larger exposures to several themes today compared to late 2016, the earliest date available for our analysis.
Digital footprint of the MSCI ACWI IMI has increased since 2016
Thematic exposures are a weighted share of constituents in the MSCI ACWI IMI associated with a particular theme as of December 31 of each year shown.
The exposure to companies involved in the digital economy, including streaming, cloud services and payment networks, has nearly doubled to over 15% today from 8% in 2016.
Another theme whose exposure is rapidly expanding — doubling since 2016 — is efficient energy, which includes companies involved in renewable power generation and alternative fuels.
Media coverage of concepts related to these two themes also rose over the same period, as shown below.
Of the two themes, digital businesses received the lion's share of media attention.
Media mentions of themes were up, but with noticeable disparities
Media intensity is based on data from MKT Mediastats and measures share of media coverage based on keywords associated with the 17 MSCI megatrends.
Gray traces indicate all other themes.
Data is from January 2015 through December 2022, which is the longest time frame available.
Thematic exposure can be influenced by a firm’s weight and its operations
To investigate why the MSCI ACWI IMI has greater digital exposure today than in 2016, we examined two factors: (1) changes in a firm's index weight from higher market capitalization, and (2) changes in a firm’s operations that generate higher theme-related revenues.1 We adapted our prior work on risk attribution for the analysis.2 New index entrants, such as IPOs and spinoffs, and divested holdings, such as delistings and bankruptcies, can also affect an index's changes in exposure.
We find distinct reasons for the heightened exposures to both themes.
Growth in the digital economy theme was dominated by incumbent firms’ expanding capitalizations, with some contribution from operational shifts.
Interestingly, despite numerous recent IPOs, new entrants with digital-focused business models contributed minimally to the digital transformation of the MSCI ACWI IMI.
The effects of firm size and operations on thematic shifts varied by theme
Bars represent the share of the total change in digital exposure from December 2016 to December 2022 in the MSCI ACWI IMI.
Size refers to changes in constituent firms’ weights, and operations refers to changes in firms’ digital-related revenues.
New entrants, however, played a significant role in increased exposure to the efficient energy theme.
In contrast to the digital economy theme, the revenue-mix changes of incumbent energy firms, including major oil explorers and producers, had a more substantial impact on exposure than index weights.
Changes in revenues and their downstream effects on thematic exposures could also stem from alterations in a firm’s disclosure practices rather than in actual business changes.
We looked more closely at the digital economy theme to compare the sources of greater exposure in the years before and after COVID-19, as shown below.
The increase in exposure before the pandemic, from 2016 to 2019, came primarily from the larger index weights of a few U.S. technology mega caps.
Since 2019, however, the increase in exposure has come mainly from firms’ higher share of digital-related revenues.
The turn toward digital after COVID-19 was driven more by firm operations
Blue bars represent the change in exposure to the digital economy theme in the MSCI ACWI IMI from December 2016 through December 2022.
Grey bars represent total exposure to the digital theme.
Top five contributors to the larger digital footprint since 2019
Five stocks — Apple Inc., NVIDIA, Intel Corporation, Meituan Class B and Accenture plc Class A — were responsible for a large share increase in digital exposure following the pandemic.
Apple contributed the most, with the boost in revenue from its turn to online stores and services proving more influential than its jump in weight to 3% from 2% in the MSCI ACWI IMI.
NVIDIA and Intel, known for their design and fabrication expertise that propelled the digital rise of numerous firms, took the next two top spots.
Intel's contribution stemmed primarily from its operations as its index weight fell over the period.
A handful of firms led higher digital exposure since 2019
Bars represent the percentage contribution to the change in digital economy exposure in the MSCI ACWI IMI from December 2019 to December 2022.
Our analysis reveals a nuanced picture of why thematic exposures have changed.
The attribution pattern for the digital economy theme didn’t hold true for all themes, however.
A clear understanding of the forces behind thematic shifts could be valuable for investors who seek to align their portfolios with lasting, structural trends.
The authors thank Zoltan Nagy for his contribution to this post.
1A firm's operations are represented by its thematic relevance score, which indicates the significance of a theme to its business activities.
The score, ranging from 0% to 100%, considers both upstream activities and disclosed revenue or earnings streams.
However, it does not explicitly measure the revenue proportion derived from theme-related activities.
2Using this method, a change in portfolio exposure can be directly related to its sources: changes in position sizes or changes in position characteristics.
The decomposition is additive and distributes the often-confusing interaction term between sources.
Further Reading
A Thematic Lens for Portfolios
Delta-Sigma Attribution: Understanding Differences in Risk
2. Pollution
From the whiff of a cigarette to tailpipe exhaust, a mask can protect you from the harmful effects of ambient air pollution.
Insurance AARP® Vision Plans from VSP™ Exclusive vision insurance plans designed for members and their families View Details See All See more Insurance offers > {"hideCategory":false,"useAlternateLanguage":false,"headlineIconAltText":"","listItems":[{"categoryTitle":"Insurance","categoryUrl":"/membership/benefits/insurance/","categoryDeeplinkParam":"insurance","isLimitedTimeOffer":false,"offerJson":{"dbr_offer_id":"d2d0044d601a7b9078b5d6800f64ea3b","source_name":"AARP® Vision Plans from VSP™","offer_title":"Vision Insurance Plans for Individuals and Families","offer_description":"\u003cp\u003eMembers can choose from one of four vision plans designed exclusively for you and your family.
All plans include an annual eye exam, glasses and lens enhancements, such as progressives and anti-glare coating, and more.\u003c/p\u003e","offer_short_description":"Exclusive vision insurance plans designed for members and their families","category_list":"insurance,healthandwellness","subcategory_list":"insurance-healthcare,healthandwellness-vision","tags":[{"tagID":"dbr:insurance","title":"Insurance","name":"insurance","deeplink_url":"/membership/benefits/insurance/","deeplink_param_value":"insurance","get_offers_url":"/etc/aarp/dbr/ws.api/offers/insurance.json","sub_tags":[{"tagID":"dbr:insurance/healthcare","title":"Healthcare","name":"healthcare","deeplink_url":"/membership/benefits/insurance/healthcare/","deeplink_param_value":"insurance-healthcare","get_offers_url":"/etc/aarp/dbr/ws.api/offers/insurance-healthcare.json"}]},{"tagID":"dbr:healthandwellness","title":"Health \u0026 Wellness","name":"healthandwellness","deeplink_url":"/membership/benefits/health/","deeplink_param_value":"healthandwellness","get_offers_url":"/etc/aarp/dbr/ws.api/offers/healthandwellness.json","sub_tags":[{"tagID":"dbr:healthandwellness/vision","title":"Vision Benefits","name":"vision","deeplink_url":"/membership/benefits/vision/","deeplink_param_value":"healthandwellness-vision","get_offers_url":"/etc/aarp/dbr/ws.api/offers/healthandwellness-vision.json"}]}],"vertical_image_url":"/content/dam/aarp/benefits_discounts/providers/vision-plans-from-vsp/258x334-man-arm-around-woman-kissing-cheek-outside.jpg","image_url":"/content/dam/aarp/benefits_discounts/providers/vision-plans-from-vsp/1140x641-man-arm-around-woman-kissing-cheek-outside.jpg","advertisement_flag":"","advertisement_sort_order":"","merchant_phone":"844-784-5862","merchant_phone_label":" or, call VSP at","howto_redeem":"Learn More","howto_redeem_url":"https://aarp.vspdirect.com/?utm_source\u003dASICOOP\u0026utm_medium\u003dMEMBEN\u0026utm_campaign\u003d3HY\u0026utm_content\u003dASICOOP","howto_redeem_expired":"Renew to Learn More","howto_redeem_expired_link":"https://appsec.aarp.org/mem/renew","howto_redeem_non_member":"Join to Learn More","howto_redeem_non_member_link":"https://secure.aarp.org/applications/membershipChallenge/showChallengeForm.action?appName\u003daccount","howto_redeem_anonymous":"Join to Learn More","howto_redeem_anonymous_link":"https://appsec.aarp.org/mem/join?campaignid\u003dUASMBP1\u0026intcmp\u003dEWHERE-MBCHAE-LP-MMA-JOIN","howto_redeem_desc":"Plan options and pricing can be found on the VSP website or call to enroll.
","member_exclusive_flag":"no","offer_type":"EverGreen","hideLeavingAARP":"","interstitial_desc":"You\u0027ll leave AARP.org and go to the website of a trusted provider.
The provider\u0027s terms, conditions, and policies apply.
","dbr_offer_type":"discount","restrictions":"\u003cp\u003eAARP commercial member benefits are provided by third parties, not by AARP or its affiliates.
Providers pay a royalty fee to AARP for the use of its intellectual property.
These fees are used for the general purposes of AARP.
Some provider offers are subject to change and may have restrictions.\u003c/p\u003e","lto_daysleft_start_control":30,"is_redeemable_in_person":"false","is_redeemable_only_in_person":false,"state_blacklist":[],"offer_timing":"anytime","line_of_business":"ASI healthcare","asi_category":"ASI Healthcare \u0026 Insurance","analytics_brand":"AARP® Vision Plans from VSP™","analytics_offerid":"vsp-vision-insurance","howto_redeem_already_registered_anon":"Member Log In","howto_redeem_already_registered_anon_link":"https://login.aarp.org/online-community/loginform.action","howto_redeem_already_registered_nonmember":"Link your membership","howto_redeem_already_registered_nonmember_link":"https://secure.aarp.org/applications/membershipChallenge/showChallengeForm.action?appName\u003daccount","offer_keywords":["aarp discounts","aarp benefits","eye exam savings","eye glasses discounts","eyesight benefits"],"offer_keywords_spanish":[],"provider_logo":"/content/dam/aarp/benefits_discounts/providers/vision-plans-from-vsp/aarp-vision-plans-vsp-logo.png","provider_logo_alt_text":"AARP® Vision Plans from VSP","provider_logo_cdn_uri":"https://cdn.aarp.net/content/dam/aarp/benefits_discounts/providers/vision-plans-from-vsp/aarp-vision-plans-vsp-logo.imgcache.rev4d0ffd6d0fd8c7d204ff3e442777d100.png","provider_logo_width":"633","provider_logo_height":"400","enable_utm_parameters":"","append_aid_paramter":"","lto_model_heading":"Limited Time Member Offers","lto_advertisement":"Member Exclusive Advertisement","ty_socialMissionFlag":"true","deeplink_param_value":"vsp-vision-insurance","howto_redeem_2":"Learn More","howto_redeem_already_registered_nonmember_label":"Already a member?","howto_redeem_already_registered_anon_label":"Already a member?","image_alt_text":"woman and man walking outside, man arm around woman\u0027s shoulder, woman kissing man on cheek, he is wearing glasses and smiling","image_title":"AARP® Vision Plans from VSP","image_cdn_uri":"https://cdn.aarp.net/content/dam/aarp/benefits_discounts/providers/vision-plans-from-vsp/1140x641-man-arm-around-woman-kissing-cheek-outside.imgcache.rev2f47f3d75b56200ce53efcfe435df1cc.jpg","tab_label_offer_details":"Details","tab_label_restrictions":"Disclosures","geoloc_tab_label":"Locations","disclaimer_label":"","geoloc_provider_legal_info":"","geoloc_miles_label_text":"Miles","geoloc_show_results_within_label_text":"Show results within","geoloc_see_more_button_text":"See More","geoloc_find_location_label":"Find a Location","geoloc_total_results_label":"Result(s)","geoloc_no_results_view_message":"There are no locations within a 100 mile radius.
Please try another location","geoloc_tab_hint_text":"Enter an address, city, or ZIP","geoloc_mobile_list_cta":"LIST VIEW","geoloc_mobile_list_cta_url":"","geoloc_mobile_map_cta":"MAP VIEW","geoloc_mobile_map_cta_url":"","geoloc_provider_link_cta_url":"","geoloc_experience_type":"","ty_ctaText":"Continue","geoloc_hide_tab":"true","ty_interstitialText":"Thanks for visiting aarp.org!
Come back again to check out all of the AARP Member Benefits and unlock the full power of membership.","howto_redeem_label":"How
to Access","ty_interstitialDesc":"Come back again to check out all of the AARP Member Benefits and unlock the full power of membership.
","ty_cancelText":"Cancel","ty_interstitialTitle":"Thanks
for visiting aarp.org!","lto_daysleft":"Days Left","provider_logo_title":"AARP® Vision Plans from VSP","geoloc_hide_see_more_button":"false","geoloc_provider_link_cta":"","offer_page_path":"","redemption_content":"","show_phone_number_above_cta":"","restrictions_label":"Disclosures","show_state_availability":"","state_availability_text":"SEE AVAILABILITY IN YOUR STATE","hideRestrictionsTab":"","ltos":[]},"parentOfferJson":{}}]}
When you inhale polluted air, the soot (or particulate matter) can seep into the bloodstream by way of the lungs and cause serious health problems, according to the World Health Organization.
And older adults are among those who are more susceptible to these complications.
“The big killer is actually ischemic heart disease,” or heart problems caused by narrowed heart arteries, says Richard Peltier, associate professor of environmental health science﻿s at the University of Massachusetts Amherst.
Research funded by the Environmental Protection Agency found that long-term exposure to air pollution accelerates the buildup of calcium in the coronary arteries, which can restrict blood flow to the heart and increase the likelihood of a heart attack.
It’s estimated that between 7 million and 9 million premature deaths annually are linked to air pollution.
“And most of that is cardiovascular disease
[and] heart attacks,” Peltier says.
A mask can help to block some air pollution particles that you might otherwise inhale, which is why people who work with dust, debris and other pollutants often wear them.
Some masks are better than others at keeping pollution particles out, Peltier notes — he recommends an N95.
3.
Flu, RSV and other respiratory ailments
COVID-19 isn’t the only respiratory illness that’s making people sick right now.
During winter especially, “many viruses circulate and cause respiratory diseases,” says Elie A. Saade, M.D., system director of medical quality and infection control at University Hospitals in Cleveland.
For example, there have been more than 25 million illnesses, 2﻿80,000 hospitalizations and 17,000 deaths from flu so far this season, according to Jan. 2﻿7 data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
And throughout the fall, patients sick with RSV, or respiratory syncytial virus, were flooding hospitals throughout the country.
While the viruses that cause these illnesses — flu, RSV and COVID — are different, they all spread in similar ways: by small and large droplets that travel through the air.
But high-quality masks, such as an N95 or similar, can help to block these germs that make us sick.
CNN —
Around 80,000 tourists are stranded in the popular resort city of Sanya on China’s tropical Hainan island after authorities announced lockdown measures to stem an outbreak of Covid-19.
Public transportation was suspended and people’s movements inside the city were restricted from early Saturday morning, authorities said.
Stranded tourists are required to stay for seven days and clear five Covid-19 tests before leaving.
Deputy mayor He Shigang on Friday said around 80,000 tourists remained in the city.
All those currently in Sanya as well as people who have been to the city since July 23 were not allowed to leave Hainan province after 6pm local time on Saturday, provincial authorities said.
The restrictions come at the height of the summer tourism season for the island province, a popular destination often called China’s Hawaii for its sandy beaches, tropical forests and high-end hotels.
Over 80% of flights leaving Sanya were cancelled on Saturday, according to data from flight tracking company Variflight.
All trains departing from Sanya were canceled, state broadcaster CCTV said Saturday.
An empty street in Sanya, 'China's Hawaii', as it imposes Covid lockdown measures on August 6. VCG/Getty Images
Authorities in Sanya acknowledged the inconvenience to tourists and pledged during a Saturday afternoon press conference to do their best to solve issues that arise, including streamlining travel booking cancellations and offering half-price discounts on hotel stays for stranded tourists in Sanya.
The city was divided into high and medium risk zones, with control measures varying depending on risk-level, according to local officials.
The whole city, however, was considered under “static management” – an official term used to describe the deployment of lockdown measures.
The city, which lies at the southern tip of Hainan island, has recorded 827 cases between August 1 and midnight on Saturday, including 240 confirmed cases and 173 asymptomatic infections on Saturday, according to an announcement from provincial health authorities Sunday morning.
China counts symptomatic and asymptomatic cases separately.
Saturday’s numbers make the outbreak the most severe in China, which reported a total of 736 confirmed and asymptomatic local cases nationally for that day.
Authorities have said they detected the highly transmissible Omicron BA.5.1.3 subvariant in the outbreak, which they believe was spread to the island via contact with overseas seafood dealers in Sanya’s Yazhou fishing port.
Hainan’s provincial authorities on Saturday also announced province-wide nucleic acid testing for its population of 10 million, as cases have been reported in other parts of the island.
Another city in Hainan, Danzhou, announced partial lockdown measures for its roughly 1 million residents on Saturday afternoon, according to an official bulletin, while authorities in Qionghai city on Sunday announced a raft of measures, closing most non-essential businesses and ordering its half a million residents to stay home unless necessary, effective that morning, state broadcaster CCTV reported.
The latest measures come as China’s economy struggles under its stringent “zero-Covid” policy, in which it aims to suppress the spread of infection via lockdowns, mass testing and tough border controls.
CNN —
When it comes to developing high blood pressure, Covid-19 might play an outsized role, a new study says.
The report, published Monday in the medical journal Hypertension, found that more than 1 in 5 patients who were hospitalized with Covid-19 – and over 1 in 10 who were not – had been diagnosed with high blood pressure six months later.
Compared with people who had influenza, another upper respiratory virus, those hospitalized with Covid-19 were over twice as likely to develop hypertension.
According to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, high blood pressure, also known as hypertension, increases the risk of heart disease and stroke, the leading causes of death in the United States.
Nearly half of the adults in the nation have hypertension, and in 2021, the CDC says, it caused nearly 700,000 deaths in the United States.
The threshold for hypertension can sometimes vary by doctor, but the most recent guidelines from the American Heart Association and the American College of Cardiology define it as a reading of 130 over 90.
In the new study, the researchers looked at the medical records of over 45,000 Covid-19 patients and nearly 14,000 influenza patients in the Bronx borough of New York City between 2020 and 2022.
Before their viral infection, none of the patients had a history of hypertension.
At a six-month follow-up appointment, the researchers then tracked which ones had new diagnoses of the heart condition.
Across the board, people who were hospitalized with Covid-19 were diagnosed with hypertension at about twice the rate of those who were not: About 21% of hospitalized Covid-19 patients were hypertensive, compared with 11% who were not hospitalized.
Of the hospitalized Covid-19 patients, more than 1 in 5 developed hypertension during their time in the hospital, while actively infected with Covid-19, despite having no history of high blood pressure.
However, in comparison with patients who were infected with the flu, Covid-19 patients had worse blood pressure outcomes.
Covid-19 patients who had been hospitalized were 2.23 times as likely to develop high blood pressure as hospitalized influenza patients.
Even Covid-19 patients who weren’t in the hospital were over 50% more likely than nonhospitalized flu patients to develop hypertension.
The high incidence of hypertension in people with Covid-19 is “alarming given the sheer number of people affected by COVID-19,” the report says.
The researchers found hypertension to be more common in a few key demographic groups.
People who were over 40 years old, were Black or had pre-existing conditions like chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), coronary artery disease or chronic kidney disease were at a higher risk of developing hypertension after a Covid-19 infection.
Patients who were treated with vasopressor medications, a class of drugs that constrict vessels to raise blood pressure, or corticosteroids, a type of anti-inflammatory drug often used to treat arthritis, were also at a higher risk.
“Given the sheer number of people affected by COVID-19 compared to influenza, these statistics are alarming and suggest that many more patients will likely develop high blood pressure in the future, which may present a major public health burden,” Dr. Tim Duong, a study author and professor of radiology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, said in a news release.
But scientists are unsure how the Covid-19 virus might trigger new-onset high blood pressure.
The study theorizes that the coronavirus could infect heart cells and disrupt blood pressure regulation or that acute kidney injury – a common complication during Covid-19 hospitalization – might contribute to hypertension.
Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.
The report also noted that most of the people in the study came from communities with low socioeconomic status, which might have increased their risk of developing high-blood pressure.
Risk factors linked with poverty, including stress and reduced access to healthy food, might have raised rates of hypertension.
As a result, the report said, longer-term follow-up research would be useful to track whether heightened blood pressure can be more closely linked to Covid-19 and, if so, what the long-term heart health effects might be.
For now, the data could tip doctors off to the link between Covid-19 and hypertension.
“These findings should heighten awareness to screen at-risk patients for hypertension after COVID-19 illness to enable earlier identification and treatment for hypertension-related complications, such as cardiovascular and kidney disease,” Duong said.
In this nationwide study of major urban cities of Pakistan in June 2021, lived experience of COVID-19 infections was uncommon in that only 3.6% reported being infected and 5% had experienced it in a family member.
Willingness to receive the vaccination was 65%, and of these, two-thirds had registered themselves to receive the vaccine.
We found that willingness to receive COVID-19 vaccination increased with age, education, and employment, but was similar among both sexes.
In our sample, 80% or more knew about COVID-19 and its vaccine.
Television, social media and family/friends were the main sources of information, whereas government, work, or school-related sources were less important, in contrast with the neighboring country India where government officials were primary sources of information rather than social media or family/friends [19].
This might perhaps be reflecting the long periods of lockdowns that have forced people away from work and schools, and towards televisions, mobile phones, or families.
Government sources are mistrusted in Pakistan as they are in the region
[20, 21].
The popularity of social or conventional mass media is a departure from other public health areas in Pakistan, e.g., family planning, where such approaches have had a more modest impact [22].
Despite awareness, only around half of the respondents said they were willing and two-thirds of those had registered to receive the vaccine.
This is lower than seen in other studies from Pakistan that focused on specific respondents [23], USA [24], UK
[25] and Europe, China and Indonesia, but higher than in Jordan and Southern Ethiopia [20, 26,27,28,29].
In our sample, 1 out of 3 respondents (35%) felt that a vaccine was not needed and slightly fewer (31%) feared either vaccine safety or its side effects.
This level of hesitancy is higher than results from USA (11% were hesitant and 32% were unsure) and UK (9% and 27%).
Individuals who had experienced the detriments on COVID-19 were more willing to get vaccinated, consistent with other studies emphasizing that motivation to vaccination is influenced by individual perception based on experience [30,31,32].
However, only a first-hand experience with the disease, and not of the family, was associated with taking action, i.e., registering to get vaccinated.
Similar to our results that individuals who perceived COVID-19 infection as riskier were more willing to get vaccinated, previous studies conducted in Asia report perceived risk to a deadly infection being associated with positive support for vaccinations [31, 32].
Since vaccination intention is context-specific [33] and influenced by COVID-19 burden [9], a lack of “lived experience”, less than 5% reported infection for self or close family members, may have contributed to the overall low acceptance of vaccination.
The country was between its 3rd and 4th waves of COVID-19 and there were fewer infections in June 2021 when this survey was conducted.
Vaccination rates increased nationwide a month later in July 2020, following a resurgence in cases and hospitalizations [34].
Additionally, at least some of the hesitancy, reasoned by ‘vaccine safety and side effects concerns’ in our study, may have been fueled by recent media coverage of thrombosis associated with the AstraZeneca vaccination in age groups below 40 years [35, 36].
Willingness and registration to receive vaccination increased with age, education, and employment.
More severe complications and higher mortality from COVID-19 infection with increasing age and associated chronic diseases have been well-recognized in Pakistan and elsewhere, which leads to increased willingness to vaccinate [25, 37,38,39].
However, mobility concerns, possible difficulty in registration process, and increased dependency on younger family members might be associated with lesser registration in older adults despite the highest willingness.
Tertiary level education was associated with both the highest intentions and registrations for vaccination; anecdotal findings suggested that this group also retained the highest demand for vaccination [40].
Employment may also have driven vaccination through government mandates.
In June, just before our data collection period, Government of Pakistan announced it would withhold the salaries of unvaccinated government employees
[41] and many private employers also mandated vaccination [42].
Those intending to receive vaccine also showed higher awareness of risks and SOPs compliance.
Despite patriarchy manifesting as avoidance of vaccination of women for the fear of causing infertility [43, 44], along with some evidence of lower willingness to vaccinate among women [24, 40, 45,46,47,48], we found no difference in vaccination intention across sexes.
Strengths and limitations
This study was large, included representative samples from major urban centers of Pakistan, and provided timely evidence to policymakers engaged in Pakistan’s COVID-19 response.
However, our study has many limitations.
The survey was undertaken during a highly dynamic period when vaccinations were being expanded to increasingly lower age groups.
Lack of current eligibility of at least some respondents may have influenced their answers.
Telephonic surveys, although necessary during global pandemic, excludes the population that either does not possess a phone or resides outside the coverage areas.
However, mobile phone usage in Pakistan is more than 80%
[49] and higher in urban areas, which were the focus of this study.
This limitation was best covered by conducting the survey through Jazz mobile company, that has the largest customer-base in the country.
Our findings might have suffered from non-response bias.
During the eligibility process, 20% of all those approached reported not having heard of COVID-19 and another 5% had not heard of the government’s vaccination program.
It is likely that at least some of those that claimed to not know of COVID-19 in mid-June 2021, did so just to not continue with the interview, as it is considered culturally inappropriate to refuse directly.
In a community face-to-face study in urban Rawalpindi and Islamabad at the same time, only around 3% of respondents had not heard of COVID-19 (manuscript in preparation).
Despite the high refusal and ineligibility, our sample corresponded to the socio-demographic distribution of the population, and we ensured weightage during analysis to account for the city-wise population and socioeconomic distribution.
Policy implications
We suggest several concrete policy implications in Pakistan.
Firstly, communication strategy focusing on youth and women, is important to address overall COVID-19 vaccination hesitancy.
Messages should be tailored to address concerns regarding vaccine safety, side-effects, myth busting and importance of vaccination in youth.
Secondly, to combat possible difficulty in registration and access to centers for older adults, mobile vaccination vans should be exploited, and national volunteer networks should be engaged to assist older adults in vaccination registration.
Thirdly, involvement of government institutes is highly necessary in influencing the public.
This urges the frequency in releasing updated statistic on the current burden of COVID-19 and the current vaccinated individuals in the country to further motivate others to increase willingness and registration for the COVID-19 vaccine.
Lastly, respondents’ reliance on health workers, social media, friends, and families as information sources imply leveraging general pro-vaccination stance to increase COVID-19 vaccination uptake.
Engaging local health workers, insisting them to share credible vaccination experiences, asserting celebrities’ endorsement could be effective social signals in driving positive shift of social norms towards greater vaccination acceptance.
COVID-19 spread
Since the first COVID-19 case was reported in the Peruvian Amazon on March 16, 2020, the virus spread in two waves in 2020 (April-June; August; Supplementary Fig. 1).
Mortality was highest early during the first wave, especially in the cities of Iquitos and Pucallpa.
A national lockdown was declared on March 16, 2020, lasting until early May, when restrictions were gradually relaxed15.
At the end of June 2020, the lockdown was lifted, though various regional restrictions such as curfews were maintained.
We conducted two rounds of community telephone surveys: a baseline survey in July 2020 (between the two waves) and a follow-up survey in August 2020 (during the second wave) (‘Surveys’ in Methods).
Our analysis sample is a balanced panel of 435 communities (240 Indigenous, 195 mestizo) (Fig. 1).
Compared to mestizo communities, Indigenous communities are found in more remote areas in all river basins, especially in the Napo, Pastaza, and Upper Ucayali (Supplementary Fig. 2).
We focus on any incidence of COVID-19 case in the community, including suspected ones (see Supplementary Note 1 for mortality).
With limited health facilities and testing for COVID-19 in the study area (19% of communities had health facilities, generally understaffed and with limited supplies to provide adequate health services), information about confirmed cases is incomplete and data on the number of cases can be inaccurate.
Although suspected case incidence may be also inaccurate, any case captures people’s perceived risk of infection in the community that would have underlain their behaviors.
The first COVID-19 case had occurred in most communities (91%) by June, i.e., within three months, during the first wave (Fig. 2A).
We estimate the predictors of initial spread across communities using regression analyses (‘Empirical design’ in Methods).
Multivariate regression analysis better captures the relationship between outcome variable (initial spread) and each predictor (e.g., distance) by controlling for other factors that may be correlated with both.
Our sensitivity analysis indicates that most regression estimates are robust to omitted variable bias (see Supplementary Note 2).
Figure 2 COVID-19 spread and evolution.
First COVID-19 case in 2020 by indigeneity (A), nonparametric relationship of first case with distance from city (B), COVID-19 evolution between the baseline survey (in July 2020) and the follow-up survey (in August 2020) by indigeneity (for example, Yes–No means any case at the baseline and no case at the follow-up) (C), and nonparametric relationship of COVID-19 evolution with distance from city (D).
In A June includes two communities which experienced first case in July and July–August means first case occurred between the baseline and follow-up surveys.
In B and D Lowess (locally weighted scatterplot smoothing) smoothers are shown; one community with log distance from city smaller than 2 km is dropped for exposition.
Full size image
Without road access in the study area, local residents rely solely on river transportation for travelling.
The river network distance from cities (Iquitos or Pucallpa) varies markedly by community (Supplementary Fig.
3A; range: 3–898 km, mean: 261 km).
The timing of initial spread across communities depended on their remoteness: the nonparametrically predicted probability of spread by April and May shows negative steep distance gradients (Fig. 2B).
The regression estimates for the initial spread by April, May, and the baseline survey are consistent with these bivariate nonparametric relationships: a 100% increase in the distance from cities decreased the probability of spread by April, for example, by 0.16 (or 44% of the mean of the dependent variable); in contrast, distances from nearest market town, district capital, and nearest community were not significant predictors (Fig. 3A, Supplementary Fig. 4, Supplementary Table 1).
Dendritic river network structure (captured by river order), trade network (with city markets), and the availability of health facility were not significant predictors either (Supplementary Table 1).
These results indicate that the primary factor determining the speed of spread was distance from the source of the virus, i.e., cities.
The spatial distribution of the timing of spread in each basin is consistent (Fig. 1A).
Figure 3 Remoteness, transportation, and indigeneity.
The estimated impacts of distance from city (log km) (A), active public river transportation (PRT) (0/1) (B), inactive PRT (0/1) (C), and indigeneity (0/1) (D) on COVID-19 spread and evolution, local private river transportation (LT), and government cash assistance (0/1), with 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors.
Full regression results are reported in Supplementary Tables 1 and 3.
Full size image
As Indigenous communities tend to be located further from cities than mestizo communities (Supplementary Figs. 2, 5; mean: 353 km vs.147 km), it took longer for the virus to reach Indigenous communities (until May), but by the time of the baseline survey in July the difference between these two types of communities had vanished (Fig. 2A).
Our regression results show that for a given distance from cities, there was no significant difference between Indigenous and mestizo communities (Fig. 3D), indicating that their difference in the timing of spread was due to their difference in remoteness, not indigeneity per se.
This illustrates the importance of multivariate regression analysis relative to bivariate correlation analysis, which would suggest significant relationships between the timing of spread and indigeneity.
A variety of watercraft—both private and public boats—navigate Amazonian rivers35,36 (‘River transportation’ in Methods).
Public river transportation is effectively the only way for local people to travel from remote communities to cities and was available for 80% of all communities (Indigenous and mestizo) before the pandemic (Supplementary Fig.
6A).
The government imposed mobility restrictions to suppress COVID-19 contagion.
During the strict lockdown period, public river transportation virtually stopped.
At the time of the baseline survey after the lockdown was lifted, public river transportation had been partially reactivated: the restriction was relaxed in 64% of communities and it was maintained in 16% (Supplementary Fig.
6A; see Supplementary Notes 3 and 4 for spatial distribution and predictors, respectively).
Although the timing of initial spread in communities with active public transportation was similar to that in communities without access to public transportation before the pandemic, in communities with inactive public transportation under the maintained restriction, the spread was delayed; this was especially so in May and June, when mobility restrictions were gradually relaxed (Fig.
3B,C; by April, spread had become quite common in communities with inactive public transportation, so transportation restrictions were maintained in these communities).
The delaying effect of transportation restrictions was large: to decrease the probability of initial spread by the time of the baseline survey, for example, by 0.15, the distance from cities needed to be greater by 170 km (-0.15/-0.087 × 100; 65% of mean distance; Supplementary Table 1).
As such, transportation restrictions were effective in delaying initial spread.
COVID-19 evolution
Although 91% of communities had experienced COVID-19 by the time of the baseline survey, a case was prevalent among 44% at that time; that is, it had been mitigated among the remaining 47% (Fig. 2A,C).
Whereas mitigation was not related to the timing of initial spread (Supplementary Note 5), it was more common in communities closer to cities, especially near Iquitos (Figs. 1,2), and in mestizo communities than Indigenous communities (64% vs. 33%; Fig. 2A,C, S2).
For a given distance from cities, there was no significant difference between these two types of communities (Fig. 3D), indicating that their difference in mitigation was due to their difference in remoteness, not indigeneity, as found for initial spread.
At the time of the follow-up survey, COVID-19 was mitigated in 26% of communities but at the same time the virus had spread in 13% (initial spread 3% and resurgence 10%); it was persistent and not prevalent in 18% and 43%, respectively, over time (Fig. 2C).
Mitigation during this period was more common in communities far from cities (Fig. 2D); thus, the location of mitigation shifted to remote areas (Fig. 1B; Supplementary Note 3).
Mitigation, persistence, and spread were more common in Indigenous communities than mestizo communities (Fig. 2C).
Distinct from initial spread, significant differences emerged across basins: whereas mitigation was common in the Pastaza and Lower Ucayali, the virus persisted in the Middle and Upper Ucayali and spread in the Napo (Supplementary Figs.
2B, 2D).
At the time of the follow-up survey, COVID-19 was more prevalent in communities far from cities and Indigenous communities, for a given distance from cities (Fig. 3A,D, Supplementary Table 1).
Hence, distinct from initial spread during the first wave and mitigation by the time of the baseline survey, a significant difference by indigeneity emerged during the second wave.
Social behaviors and transportation restrictions
People in communities employed a wide range of self-protective behaviors.
We construct two indices (z-score): (1) preventive measures mostly based on individual behaviors (e.g., handwashing) before the baseline survey (mid-March-July), which captures initial adoption, and at the time of the follow-up survey, and (2) social restrictions consisting of community-level restrictions (e.g., no communal meeting) at the time of each survey (‘Social behaviors’ in Methods).
Over time, preventive measures became weaker and social restrictions became somewhat stronger (Supplementary Fig.
7A; see Supplementary Notes 3 and 6 for spatial distribution and individual self-preventive behavioral measures, respectively).
Both preventive measures and social restrictions became relatively stronger in Indigenous communities than in mestizo communities (Supplementary Figs.
7B,C; Supplementary Note 6).
Almost three quarters of communities had communication access (internet, cell phone, or radiophone) (the surveys covered communities without communication access as discussed in ‘Surveys’ in Methods; see Supplementary Note 3 for spatial distribution).
Radiophones are typically available in some communities beyond the reach of cell phone coverage.
When we consider these three modes separately, preventive measures at the baseline were stronger in communities with radiophone, but not internet or cell phone access, although social restrictions were stronger in communities with any of these three modes (Fig. 4A).
In contrast, preventive measures and social restrictions at the follow-up were unrelated to these three communication modes.
They were not related to the presence of a health facility over time (Supplementary Table 2), whereas both were strong in communities far from cities over time (Fig. 4A).
Figure 4 Social behaviors and transportation restrictions.
The estimated predictors of self-protective behaviors (z-score) (A), the estimated impacts of a change in self-protective behaviors (z-score) and public river transportation (PRT) (0/1) on COVID-19 mitigation and spread between the baseline and follow-up surveys (0/1) (B), heterogenous impacts by PRT and indigeneity (C), and heterogenous impacts by distance from city (percentile) (D), with 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors.
Full size image
The status of public river transportation changed between the baseline and follow-up surveys: it was inactivated (the restriction which had been relaxed before the baseline was reimplemented) and activated (the restriction which had been maintained at the baseline was relaxed) among 10% and 13% of communities, respectively, and remained active and inactive among 54% and 3%, respectively (Supplementary Fig.
6A).
These patterns were similar between Indigenous and mestizo communities (see Supplementary Notes 3 and 4 for spatial distribution and predictors, respectively).
We examine the impacts of a change in preventive measures and social restrictions (indices), and activated and inactivated public river transportation (indicator variables) on the mitigation and spread (mainly resurgence) of COVID-19 between the baseline and follow-up surveys (‘Empirical design’ in Methods).
This first difference specification addresses the endogeneity of social behaviors by controlling for time-invariant community heterogeneity including unobserved factors that could cause omitted variable bias.
Inactivated public transportation reduced the probability of spread (by 0.13, or almost 100% of the mean), but did not increase mitigation (Fig. 4B).
Thus, reimplementing the transportation restriction was effective to prevent (eliminate) the spread.
Consistently, COVID-19 was less prevalent in communities with inactive public transportation at the baseline (Fig. 3C).
In contrast, activated public transportation decreased the probability of mitigation (by 0.21, or over 90% of the mean).
Thus, lifting transportation restrictions almost entirely counteracted mitigation.
Both preventive measures and social restrictions increased mitigation but did not reduce spread (Fig. 4B; see Supplementary Note 7 for results for individual self-preventive behavioral measures).
These impacts are comparatively smaller than those of transportation restrictions: to entirely counteract the diminishing effect of activated public transportation on mitigation, preventive measures and social restrictions, respectively, need to be increased by about 2 and 3.5 standard deviations (0.21/0.11 and 0.21/0.06).
Thus, self-protective behaviors were effective to mitigate contagion, but not to prevent it.
A new, open, transparent sublicence agreement between the Medicines Patent Pool (MPP) on behalf of C-TAP, and South African pharmaceutical company Biotech Africa will accelerate the manufacture and sale of a COVID-19 serological antibody technology around the world.
The World Health Organization welcomes the sublicence agreement, the first of its kind to be signed under the auspices of the WHO’s COVID-19 Technology Access Pool (C-TAP) initiative.
C-TAP was set up in 2020 to facilitate the timely, equitable and affordable access to COVID-19 health products.
The new agreement builds on a licensing agreement announced by WHO and MPP last year with Spain’s National Research Council (CSIC).
The non-exclusive sublicence allows Biotech to manufacture and commercialize CSIC’s COVID-19 serological test worldwide.
“The most effective way to get – and keep – ahead of COVID-19 is to keep testing,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General.
“This new agreement means we can take advantage of untapped manufacturing capacity so more people in more countries can have easier access to affordable diagnostics.”
The test effectively checks for the presence of anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies developed either in response to a COVID-19 infection or to a vaccine.
The agreement covers all related patents and the biological material needed to manufacture the test.
CSIC will provide all know-how to Biotech as well as training.
The licence will be royalty-free for low- and middle-income countries and will remain valid until the date the last patent expires.
“BioTech Africa is honoured to have been selected to be the first biotechnology company in Africa to collaborate with C-TAP in order to facilitate the local manufacture of affordable COVID-19 surveillance devices,” said Jenny Leslie, Biotech Africa Chief Operations Officer.
“This recognition is a product of our perseverance and dedication to become a global player in the manufacture of the highest quality recombinant proteins.
The signing of this agreement emphasizes the company’s ongoing goal to support diagnostics needs around the world,” Leslie said.
“We are thrilled to see the COVID-19 Technology Access Pool initiative bearing fruits with the goal of providing equitable access to life-saving health products for the world´s most vulnerable people,” said Charles Gore, MPP Executive Director.
Launched in 2020 by the WHO Director-General and the President of Costa Rica, and supported by 44 WHO Member States, C-TAP aims to facilitate timely, equitable and affordable access to COVID-19 health products by boosting their production and supply through open, non-exclusive licensing agreements.
The C-TAP platform provides a global one-stop-shop for developers of COVID-19 therapeutics, diagnostics, vaccines and other priority health technologies to share knowledge and data and license their intellectual property to additional manufacturers through public health-driven, voluntary, non-exclusive and transparent licences.
By pooling technologies, developers of COVID-19 health products can boost manufacturing capacity in all regions and expand access to life-saving tools.
On Monday, May 10, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration expanded the Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) for Pfizer’s COVID-19 vaccine to include adolescents 12-15 years of age.
On Wednesday, May 12, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) met to make final recommendations for the use of the vaccine for adolescents in this age group.
Based on the final recommendations of the ACIP, the Southern Nevada Health District has begun administering Pfizer COVID-19 vaccine to children ages 12 and older at Health District sites.
Registration for appointments is now available at www.snhd.info/covid-vaccine.
“The availability of the COVID-19 vaccine for younger children is welcome news,” said Dr. Fermin Leguen, District Health Officer for the Southern Nevada Health District.
“Children are just as susceptible to getting the virus that causes COVID-19 as adults.
Younger people may not be as likely to get severely ill, but it is still a risk, and they can spread the virus to others who may be more at risk for complications from the illness.
The more people that are vaccinated in our community, the better protected everyone will be.”
Children who are newly eligible to get the vaccine will be able to do so at existing Health District and partner sites that administer the Pfizer vaccine.
Children under the age of 18 must also have written consent from a parent or guardian at the time of services.
The Health District’s policy is available on its website.
The COVID-19 vaccines are safe, effective and free, and the Health District is urging parents and guardians to ensure their children are fully vaccinated and protected from COVID-19.
As of May 12, there have been 940,283 COVID-19 doses initiated, 724,903 doses completed, and a total of 1,602,078 COVID-19 doses administered in Clark County.
Appointments at Health District and community partner vaccine clinics are available at www.snhd.info/covid-vaccine or by calling the state’s vaccine hotline at 1-800-401-0946, 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. daily.
Additional clinic information can be found online at www.NVCOVIDFighter.org.
The site also features live chat support to make scheduling a COVID-19 vaccine appointment and getting information about the vaccine more accessible.
(UPDATED) Risk of heart inflammation remains lower after vaccination than after SARS-CoV-2 infection for most age/sex groups.
(UPDATED)
One of the largest studies to date confirms once again that the risk of myocarditis is low after COVID-19 vaccination, and in most cases, the hazard is even lower than what accompanies
SARS-CoV-2 infection itself.
That’s according to a study of nearly 43 million people who received at least one vaccine dose in England.
The risk varies on the basis age, sex, and shot type, however, with vaccine-associated myocarditis risks being highest in men younger than 40, especially after a second dose of Moderna’s vaccine, lead author Martina Patone, PhD (University of Oxford, England), and colleagues reported in a study published Monday online in Circulation.
Overall, the findings, derived from an extremely large data set, confirm prior research on myocarditis associated with the COVID-19 vaccines, study author Keith Channon, MBChB, MD (University of Oxford), told TCTMD.
Previous studies have shown that myocarditis is rare after vaccination and carries benign consequences in the vast majority of patients.
“By far the biggest risk of inflammation of the heart is related to COVID infection.
That is very clear.
The risk is still not very high, but statistically it’s by far the most clear risk: if you get COVID, you are much more likely to then get myocarditis, or other cardiac problems, afterwards,” Channon said.
He noted, too, that myocarditis is just one of the many adverse health consequences of COVID-19.
“The overwhelming recommendation is strongly in favor of COVID vaccination, even when myocarditis is the endpoint,” Channon said.
Commenting for TCTMD, Yuk Law, MD (Seattle Children’s Hospital and the University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle), said via email that these findings “will aid health officials in further stratifying who should receive which vaccines, including boosters.”
They also “allow for a frank and transparent discussion on the pros and cons of vaccination,” said Law, who is chair of the American Heart Association’s scientific statement on myocarditis in children.
“Does a completely healthy teenage male, without high-risk family members or close contacts, require a full set of vaccines at the interval prescribed?
Or should he be selective of the vaccine available/accessible to him?
For healthcare officials, further assessment of the risk-to-benefit balance regarding age and sex with comorbidities should be done using data from this and other nationwide-based studies.”
The overwhelming recommendation is strongly in favor of COVID vaccination, even when myocarditis is the endpoint.
Keith Channon
A previous study from the Oxford group, published in Nature Medicine in December 2021, demonstrated a greater risk of myocarditis-related hospitalization or death following one dose of the adenoviral vaccine from Oxford/AstraZeneca and two doses of the mRNA vaccines from Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna, although the risk was even higher after a positive SARS-CoV-2 test.
This new study expands on those findings by including a much larger sample size with a wider range of ages, as well as data on booster doses of vaccine.
The analysis, a self-controlled case series, included data on more than 42.8 million individuals ages 13 and older who received at least one dose of COVID-19 vaccine in England between December 1, 2020, and December 15, 2021.
The investigators drew on information from UK national databases of COVID-19 vaccination, mortality, hospital admissions, and SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Of the individuals included in the study, about 21.2 million received three doses of vaccine (which means they received a booster) and 5.9 million had a recorded SARS-CoV-2 infection either before or after vaccination.
Overall, myocarditis-related hospitalization or death occurred in 2,861 individuals (0.007% of the total vaccinated cohort), with 617 events (0.001% of the total cohort) recorded 1 to 28 days after any dose of vaccine.
In comparison, the rate of myocarditis 1 to 28 days after a positive SARS-CoV-2 test was 0.003%, with most of these events (58.5%) occurring before any vaccine doses had been administered.
The investigators then estimated incidence rate ratios (IRRs) for myocarditis, finding increased risks of the complication 1 to 28 days after vaccination associated with one dose of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine (IRR 1.33) and any of three doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine (IRRs 1.52-1.72).
Though risk was not significantly increased after the first Moderna dose, it was substantially higher after the second dose (IRR 11.76) and remained elevated after a booster dose (IRR 2.64).
All of those figures, with the exception of the IRR following the second Moderna dose, were lower than the risks associated with getting a positive SARS-CoV-2 test result either before or after vaccination (IRR 11.14 and 5.97, respectively).
“Although the risk of myocarditis with SARS-CoV-2 infection remains after vaccination, it was substantially reduced, suggesting vaccination provides some protection from the cardiovascular consequences of SARS-CoV-2,” Patone et al write.
The relationships between vaccination and myocarditis were stronger in men younger than 40 than in other age/sex groups for all vaccines.
In this group, the number of excess myocarditis events was higher after a second Moderna dose than after a positive SARS-CoV-2 test (97 vs 16 per million people vaccinated); excess events were fewer with other vaccine types and doses than with SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Higher Risk With Moderna Vaccine
The increased likelihood of myocarditis after receipt of the Moderna vaccine, particularly after the second dose, is consistent with prior analyses of data from Denmark, the United States, and four Nordic countries, with public health agencies in some countries recommending against use of the shot in certain age/sex groups.
Channon advised caution in interpreting that finding, however, pointing out that the number of people who received the Moderna vaccine was lower than the number who received the others—with a lower absolute number of myocarditis cases, too—and that the shot was rolled out later in the pandemic after many people had already had COVID-19 or been vaccinated with either the Oxford/AstraZeneca or Pfizer/BioNTech vaccines.
Thus, the pandemic landscape was different when Moderna shots were going into people’s arms.
The results showing a higher risk after a second Moderna dose are “interesting and they’re provocative and they should make us be cautious about the way we think about recommending different types of vaccines for different age groups potentially.
That’s something for the vaccine policy makers to take on board,” Channon said.
But, he added, “there are some reservations about the interpretation of a single study, even though this study is very large.”
Nonetheless, this type of study should be a part of discussions around vaccination guidance, Channon said.
“Policy makers will need to take into consideration a wide range of different factors.
At the very least, this paper should be very much part of the evidence base that vaccine policy makers draw on to make their recommendations in the future.”
Ultimately, he said, “it’s important for us to take these findings into consideration, but it doesn’t alter the strong recommendation that vaccination is by far the lower-risk strategy than not having a vaccination based on possible complications and then exposing oneself to the risk of COVID infection.”
For Law, the results of the study should be extended to children cautiously because they made up a small proportion of the cohort, but they “shed light on our understanding of myocarditis in children in that the central hypothesis to the pathogenesis of myocarditis in children is that it starts with a viral infection, but that the additional and progressive injury to the heart is likely related to the robust immune response,” he said.
“Although the study by Patone et al did not study children per se, the observation of a younger age predisposition to vaccine-related myocarditis may be like the heightened immune response in viral myocarditis in children.”
Aside from the public health implications, Channon also highlighted what the study demonstrates when it comes to conducting this type of research.
He pointed to the massive scale and comprehensive nature of the data set, which allows for the detection of very small effect sizes that would otherwise remain hidden.
“By marrying the academic expertise of the University of Oxford with access to a very, very large national data set, via the UK’s National Health Service, this is an exemplar of how you can come up with some really important, powerful findings, and this ought to be the way that this type of research is done in the future,” Channon said.
During the current COVID-19 pandemic, the availability of CT scan datasets is necessary and significant to provide deepen understanding and valuable information about this viral infection.
It is essential for earlier diagnosis of COVID-19 and timely medical intervention.
To perform experiment, 80% of dataset is chosen for training whereas 20% is assigned for testing purpose.
Experimental setup and dataset
This section illustrates the two datasets considered for experimentation purpose.
Datasets chosen for experimentation purpose have no missing values, up to date and accurate.
Both datasets are open-source and are available.
Brazilian dataset (SARS-COV2 CT scan dataset)
The SARS CT scan dataset comprises of 2482 CT scans of 120 patients which includes 1252 CT scans of 60 infected patients and 1230 CT images of 60 patients which were non-infected shown in Fig.
4.
The data was gathered from real patients from hospital in Sao-Paulo, Brazil hospitals.
Figure 4 (1): examples of 3D CT scan images that are COVID positive (Left) and (2) non-COVID-19 (Right) from SARS_CoV2 Data-set.
(3)Examples of 3D CT scan images that are COVID positive (Left) and (4) non-COVID-19 (Right) from Hust19 Data-set.
(5) Examples of 3D CT scan images that are COVID positive (Left) and (6) non-COVID-19 (Right) from COVIDx Data-set.
Full size image
CT Scan Images varies in image size such as image of small size consist of 104 × 153 dimension and larger image comprises of 484 × 416 dimension.
The dataset contains heterogenous CT scan images having low number of instances.
In additions, CT scan images are of different contrast and resolution.
This open source dataset is available on https://www.kaggle.com/plameneduardo/sarscov2-ctscan-dataset.
Basic purpose of this dataset was to promote development and research of artificial intelligent methods that are able to determine person infected by SARS-CoV-2 using CT scans.
In case of SARS-CoV-2 CT-scan dataset (Brazilian dataset) necessary IRB and/or ethics committee approvals was obtained.
Hust19 dataset
Hust19 is multiclass dataset comprises of three types of CT slices such as Non_informative CT (NiCT), Postive CT (pCT) and Negative Ct (nCT).
NiCT contains 5705 scan images which have no information about lung parenchyma whereas pCT includes 4001 CT scan images that contains imaging features related to COVID-19 pneumonia shown in Fig. 4.
The third type of Hust19 dataset, negative (nCT) comprises of 9979 CT images which were not related to COVID19 pneumonia.
The HUST19 CT scan data-set comprises of 19,685 CT scan slices.
Dataset is open source and is available on https://bioengineeringcommunity.nature.com/posts/hust-19-for-predicting-covid-19-clinical-outcomes.
Hust19 was made available under a CC BY-NC 4.0 license.
Hust19 was accumulated from lab of union hospital, Wuhan.
It contains number of chest CT (computed tomography) images and clinical features from patients having or without COVID-19.
Comparison with state-of-the-art methods
The performance of proposed method is evaluated by comparing it with existing methods.
Details on the performance evaluation of Brazilian Datasets are presented in Fig.
5a.
To evaluate the proposed method performance, 80% of dataset is used for training while 20% is hold out for testing purpose.
Several parameters are considered for experimental evaluation.
Patch size of 10 × 10, 200 number of epochs and input image resolution of 300 × 300 was considered for comparing the proposed method with state of art methods.
By increasing the input image size, patch size and resolution of image on HUST19 dataset, results in increase in accuracy of our approach as shown in Fig.
5b,c. Whereas, number of epochs have no significant effect on proposed approach accuracy.
Figure 5b reveals that when patch size of 10 is employed, AUC value is 0.966 whereas AUC tends to increase to 0.977 when patch size of 12 is used as shown in Fig.
5c.
Figure 5 Performance evaluation of proposed vision transformer based approach (a): results on Brazilian dataset (b) results on Hust19 Data-sets using patch size 10 (c) results on Hust19 Data-sets using patch size 12.
Full size image
Different methods are utilized for comparison propose such as VGG16, Inceptionv3 and Resnet50.
We train the network for 200 epochs, and network is tested with test set in each epoch.
There are 12 number of steps in each epoch.
All the methods are evaluated with accuracy metric which allows us to make performance comparison with two CT scan images datasets.
For binary classification (COVID, Non-COVID) on Brazilian Dataset, the test accuracy of Resnet50, InceptionV3, VGG16 is 90.0%, 82.0%, and 81.0%, respectively.
AUROC of three ensemble classifiers are shown in Figs. 6 and 7.
These classifiers are applied on Brazilian and Hust19 dataset that shows better performance on Brazilian Dataset.
However, AUROC of GradientBoost and voting based classifier reveals good performance in case of Hust19 dataset as well.
Ada-boost, Gradient-boosting, voting classifiers achieved 84%, 96.0%, and 97.0% accuracy on Hust19 dataset respectively.
It has been revealed from experimentation that loss value using the proposed ViT based approach is less as compared to state of art methods.
The precision recall value on different classes of Hust19 dataset are shown in Fig.
5b revealing model good performance on two classes.
Less precision and recall value of class 2 could be because of a smaller number of instances were available to train the model.
Furthermore, resultant accuracy on hust19 dataset is 99.6%.
The number of transformer layers, patch size and image resolution have an impact on precision recall curve.
Proposed approach achieved 94% accuracy by using the image resolution of (150 × 150) and patch size of 6.
We trained the models with 200 epochs, learning rate of (1 × e − 3), batch size of 156, patch size of 10, transformer layers of 8 and image resolution was set to (300 × 300) results in 98% accuracy on Brazilian and 99.6% accuracy on Hust19 dataset.
Figure 6 Performance evaluation of ensemble classifier on Hust19 Data-set (a) AdaBoost (b) GradientBoost (c) voting-based classifier.
Full size image
Figure 7 Performance evaluation of ensemble classifier on Brazilian Data-set (a) AdaBoost (b) GradientBoost (c) voting-based classifier.
Full size image
To compare models’ performances on multi-class dataset (Hust19), and to show the proposed technique effectiveness, we calculated the overall precision, recall and accuracy.
The results are illustrated in Figs. 6 and 8.
The ensemble classifiers, Ada-Boost, Gradient-Boosting and Voting based classifiers have achieved accuracy of 81%, 99.0%, and 95.0% respectively.
While on the contrary, deep learning-based classifiers, VGG16, Resnet50 and InceptionV3 results in 96%, 97.0%, and 97.9% accuracy.
Figure 9 shows the results of deep learning classifiers (VGG16, InceptionV3, Resnet50) on Brazilian dataset.
Figure 8 Performance evaluation of deep learning classifier on Hust19 Data-set.
Full size image
Figure 9 Performance evaluation of deep learning classifier on Brazilian Data-set.
Full size image
The highest accuracy 99.6% on multi-class dataset is achieved by our proposed approach.
Compared to the current deep learning based and ensemble classifiers, proposed ViT based approach has achieved better accuracy, suggesting that self-attention transformer using CT Scan images could be a reliable method in recognizing and detecting COVID-19 patients.
Table 1 presents the accuracy of proposed approach, ensemble, and deep learning-based classifiers on binary and multi-class dataset.
In Hust19 dataset, number of instances belonging to third class is very low as compared to other classes.
Image variation in this dataset is also low and number of instances belonging to each variation are high that help the classifiers to achieve better accuracy.
Table 1
Accuracy of classifiers on binary and multi-class data-set.
Full size table
Comparison with existing studies
A comparison of proposed approach is performed with existing studies as well.
There are several studies utilizing Brazilian and Hust19 dataset to diagnose the COVID-19 as illustrated in Table 2.
In one of the research studies, a machine learning based algorithms was developed33 to diagnose COVID-19.
Several machine learning models such as artificial neural networks, random forests, extra trees, gradient boosting and catboost were employed on Brazilian Dataset.
All the models performed well, results in area under curve higher than achieved 92% and 82% sensitivity and specificity value respectively.
In the proposed approach, tenfold cross validation was also performed.
In another research study34, a voting-based approach was used for COVID-19 diagnosis.
The proposed approach was applied on Brazilian dataset results in achieving accuracy and precision value of 87% and 99% respectively.
In this approach, a cross dataset validation was also performed which illustrated that accuracy drops from 87 to 56%.
Table 2
Accuracy of classifiers on binary and multi-class data-set.
Full size table
Furthermore, xDNN was also applied in35 to diagnose the COVID-19 and Brazilian dataset, collected from different hospitals of Brazil was used for testing purpose.
Moreover, xDNN classifier demonstrates good results in terms of explainable for detection of COVID-19 using CT slices.
Furthermore, it also gives explanation using IF.
THEN rules on actual CT scan images.
The proposed approach35 achieved 97.38% accuracy.
For detection of COVID-19, another approach36 utilized convolutional neural network and ConvLSTM.
Approach was tested on two types of datasets which includes X-Ray and Brazilian CT scan images.
In addition, pneumonia and COVID-19 image categories were classified for validation of approach36.
Approach36 achieved an accuracy of 99% which reveals that it can be considered for quick screening of COVID-19.
Table 2 demonstrate the results of existing classifiers for COVID-19 diagnosis.
Table 2 demonstrate the results of existing classifiers for COVID-19 diagnosis.
Our proposed vision-based transformer approach take 1 s per step in epochs for COVID-19 diagnosis.
Cross-corpus data-set validation
For this experiment, we examine the impact of training model on one dataset and testing it on another one.
The Hust19 dataset is first used only for training and for testing the model, Brazilian dataset is used.
We also evaluated another scenario such as using Brazilian dataset for training the model and Hust19 is used as a test set.
The result of this scenario showed a decline in the model performance as can be seen in Fig. 10, and one of the possible reasons behind this behaviour can be variation in images.
The model could find out the patterns of one image indicating COVID-19 existence, but these may not seem in another dataset.
Training on Hust19 and testing Brazilian dataset showed worse results since Hust19 training set is not like Brazilian dataset.
Since vision transformer model poorly generalize on small dataset that could be a reason in worse performance when cross corpus data-set validation is performed.
Figure 10 (a) Cross dataset Results (Train Brazilian & Test Hust19)
(b) Cross dataset Results (Train Hust19 & Test Brazilian) (c) Cross dataset Results (Train Hust19 & Test COVIDx CT).
Full size image
As we can see in Fig. 10c, precision and recall value of performing cross corpus between Hust19 and Brazilian dataset decreases rapidly although it was quite good in case of COVIDx CT dataset.
Because Hust19 and COVIDx CT datasets are quite similar whereas Brazilian dataset was totally different from both datasets.
Variation in images is high as compared to other datasets and number of images belonging to each variation are quite low.
In case of training the model using Hust19 dataset and testing s performed using COVIDx dataset, proposed approach achieved accuracy of 94% which is higher than the existing studies29,30,31 having accuracy of 83.6% on Hust19 and 90% on their own dataset.
The Global COVID-19 Vaccine Coverage Tool includes data as of July 24, 2023.
We will not be updating in the future.
For more recent data, please visit Our World in Data.
About This Tracker
This tracker provides current data on the share of the population having received at least one COVID-19 vaccine dose and fully vaccinated by country, income-level, region, and globally.
Additionally, this tool estimates future vaccine coverage levels if the current rates of administration are maintained going forward and compares these coverage levels to global vaccination targets.
These targets include 40% by the end of 2021 (set by the World Health Organization), 70% by mid-2022 (set by the WHO), and 70% by the United Nations General Assembly in 2022 (set by the U.S.).
This tracker will be updated regularly as new data are available.
Related Content:
Key Findings
While most of the public continue to have confidence in the benefits of childhood vaccines for measles, mumps, and rubella, the experience of the COVID-19 pandemic and debates over vaccine requirements and mandates appear to have had an impact on public attitudes towards MMR vaccine requirements for public schools.
The latest KFF COVID-19 Vaccine Monitor survey finds that about seven in ten adults (71%) say healthy children should be required to get vaccinated for MMR in order to attend public schools, down from 82% who said the same in an October 2019 Pew Research Center poll.
Almost three in ten (28%) now say that parents should be able to decide not to vaccinate their school-age children, even if this creates health risks for others, up from 16% in 2019.
Among Republicans and Republican-leaning independents, there has been a 24 percentage-point increase in the share who hold this view (from 20% to 44%).
With COVID-19 cases rising across the country, just about a third of adults say they are worried they will get seriously sick from COVID-19, though nearly half of the public say they are worried about an increase in COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations in the U.S. this winter.
As previous KFF surveys have repeatedly found, Black and Hispanic adults continue to be more concerned about the pandemic compared to White adults, with about two-thirds of Black adults (68%) and Hispanic adults (69%) saying they are worried about an increase in cases and hospitalizations this winter, compared to about four in ten White adults who say the same.
Older adults are more likely than those under age 65 to say they are worried they will get seriously sick from COVID-19 (43% vs. 34%) and that cases and hospitalizations will rise this winter (60% vs. 46%).
As the country faces a “tripledemic”, with a surge in flu and RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) cases accompanying the rise in COVID-19 cases, many parents are now concerned about not one, but all three of these viruses.
About half of parents are worried their child will get seriously sick from COVID-19 or the flu.
A slight majority of parents (56%) say they are worried their child will get seriously sick from RSV – rising to more than seven in ten parents with a child under the age of 5 (73%), an age group that is particularly vulnerable to RSV.
Though many no longer see COVID-19 as a uniquely urgent threat, public health officials continue to encourage vaccination and emphasize the importance of the updated bivalent booster to help prevent serious illness and death from COVID-19, particularly in light of holiday gathering and travel.
However, public uptake of the updated booster is relatively tepid, with just about one in five adults saying they have already gotten it.
Democrats (38%) and adults ages 65 and older (39%) have been more eager, with about four in ten saying have already gotten the updated COVID-19 booster which has been available since September.
Fewer young adults under the age of 30 (11%) and Republicans (12%) report having gotten an updated booster dose.
Though public health officials have stressed the importance of the updated COVID-19 booster for older adults who are more vulnerable to complications from a COVID infection, more than half of adults ages 65 and older have not yet gotten the updated booster.
About a third (36%) of vaccinated adults ages 65 and older who have not yet gotten the bivalent booster say they don’t think they need it (36%) and a similar share say they don’t think the benefit of the updated booster is worth it.
Vaccinated Republicans and Republican-leaning independents are particularly skeptical of the value of the updated booster with about two-thirds of those who have not yet gotten it saying they don’t think they need it (64%) and that the benefit is not worth it (61%) while Democrats are most likely to say they have been too busy or haven’t had the time to get the update booster (51%).
The Impact Of COVID-19 On Attitudes Towards Other Childhood Vaccines
Despite the politicization of the COVID-19 vaccine and decreasing levels of trust in the FDA and CDC, most adults (85%) say the benefits of childhood vaccines for measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) outweigh the risks, with little change from the share who said the same in a Pew Research Center poll in 2019 (88%).
Though there were no significant differences across partisans in 2019, our survey finds that Republicans and Republican-leaning independents are now less likely than their Democratic counterparts believe the benefits of MMR vaccines outweigh the risks (83% vs. 91%).
While most parents of children under age 18 (80%) say they think the benefits of childhood MMR vaccines outweigh the risks, about one in six parents (17%) think the risks of these vaccines outweigh the benefits.
Among adults who have not gotten vaccinated for COVID-19, about one in four (26%) say the risks of childhood vaccines for measles, mumps, and rubella outweigh the benefits.
Nonetheless, it remains notable that even among adults who have not gotten the COVID-19 vaccine, most (70%) say the benefits of childhood MMR vaccines outweigh the risks.
While confidence in the benefits of childhood MMR vaccines remains high, the debate over COVID-19 vaccine mandates may have had some spillover effects on attitudes towards requiring MMR vaccines for children attending public school.
Currently, all states and the District of Columbia require children to be vaccinated against certain diseases, including measles and rubella, in order to attend public schools, though exemptions are allowed in certain circumstances.
Yet, there has been a notable decrease since 2019 in the share of adults who say “healthy children should be required to be vaccinated (for MMR) in order to attend public schools because of the potential risk for others when children are not vaccinated,” with 71% saying they should be required to do so, an 11 percentage point decrease from a October 2019 Pew Research Center poll.
Almost three in ten (28%) now say parents “should be able to decide not to vaccinate their children, even if that may create health risks for other children and adults,” an increase from 16% in 2019.
This decrease in support for MMR vaccine requirements for children in public schools is driven by Republicans and Republican-leaning independents – just a slight majority of Republicans (56%) say healthy children should be required to be vaccinated to attend public schools, a 23 percentage-point decline from 2019 when about eight in ten expressed support for such a requirement.
More than four in ten Republicans and Republican-leaning independents (44%) now say that parents should be able to decide not to vaccinate their children, up from 20% in 2019.
This compares to 11% of Democratic-leaning parents who say the same, a share that has held steady since 2019.
Among parents of children under age 18, about two-thirds (65%) think healthy children should be required to be vaccinated to attend public schools, down from 76% who said the same in 2019.
One-third (35%) of parents now believe parents should be able to decide not to vaccinate their children, up from 23% in 2019.
While we cannot know the pre-pandemic attitudes that adults who are currently not vaccinated for COVID-19 held about childhood MMR vaccines, most (63%) of these adults unvaccinated for COVID-19 say that parents should be able to decide not to vaccinate their children, even if that creates health risks for children and adults.
Just about four in ten (37%) adults who are not vaccinated for COVID-19 say that healthy children should be required to be vaccinated in order to attend public school.
COVID-19 And Other Winter Illnesses
With reports of COVID-19 cases increasing across the country, just about a third of adults (36%) say they are worried that they will get seriously sick from COVID-19, similar to the share which expressed this concern in January (34% worried) amidst the initial omicron surge in the U.S., but up from November 2021 (30% worried) before the omicron variant became widespread.
However, about half of the public (49%) say they are worried that there will be an increase in COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations this year.
Adults ages 65 and older, who are more vulnerable to negative outcomes from a COVID-19 infection, are more likely than younger adults to express worry about a winter COVID-19 surge (60% vs. 46%) and to worry that they will get seriously sick from the virus (43% vs. 34%).
As previous KFF surveys have found time and time again, people of color continue to be more concerned about the pandemic compared to White adults.
The December KFF COVID-19 Vaccine Monitor survey finds that about two-thirds of Black adults (68%) and Hispanic adults (69%) say they are very worried about an increase in COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations this winter, compared to about four in ten White adults (39%) who express the same concern.
Black and Hispanic adults (49% and 60%, respectively) are also more likely than White adults (26%) to worry that they will personally get seriously sick from the virus.
Worries About COVID-19 And Other Winter Viruses In Children
This winter has not only brought reports of increasing COVID-19 cases, but also widespread reports of a surge in flu and RSV cases, particularly among children.
In a sign that COVID-19 is changing from being a singular concern to part of the landscape of different illnesses people worry about, parents’ worries about their children getting sick from COVID this winter are about on par with their worries about other viruses like flu and RSV.
About half of parents (47%) say they are “very” or “somewhat” worried that their children will get seriously sick from COVID-19 and a similar share (51%) say they are worried their children will get seriously sick from the flu.
A slight majority of parents (56%) say they are worried their child will get seriously sick from RSV – rising to 73% of parents with children under the age of 5, who are particularly vulnerable to RSV.
Notably, despite half of parents saying they are worried their child may get seriously sick from the flu, just a third of parents (34%) say their child has gotten a flu shot for the current flu season.
Uptake Of The Updated Bivalent COVID-19 Booster
Although for many people COVID-19 may be less of an urgent concern this winter, public health officials continue to emphasize the importance of boosters in reducing the risk of serious illness and death particularly among the most vulnerable.
Despite this, the public’s response to the new bivalent booster has been somewhat lackluster.
About four in ten adults say they have either received the updated bivalent COVID-19 booster dose (22%) , which has been available since September, or say they plan to get the new booster as soon as possible (16%).
About one in ten adults say they want to “wait and see” before getting the new booster (12%), while a similar share (13%) say they will only get it if they are required to do so.
A further 9% say they will definitely not get the new updated booster while about one in four adults (27%) are unvaccinated or only partially vaccinated, and therefore not eligible for the updated bivalent booster dose.
KFF’s September COVID-19 Vaccine Monitor survey, fielded shortly after the new updated booster was made available, found that more than a third of older adults ages 65 and older said they intended to get the updated booster as soon as possible.
This month’s survey finds that many of these older adults remain eager, with four in ten adults ages 65 and older (39%) saying they have already gotten the updated COVID-19 booster while 16% say they will do so as soon as they can.
However, this still leaves more than half of older adults, who are more vulnerable to complications from a COVID infection, without the protection of the updated booster.
Democrats also seem eager to get the updated booster with about four in ten (38%) saying they have already done so.
Indeed, Democrats are three times as likely as Republicans to report having already gotten the updated COVID-19 booster (38% vs. 12%).
Notably, about three in ten Republicans say they will only get the updated booster if they are required to do so (12%) or say they will “definitely not” get the new COVID-19 booster dose (18%).
A further 37% of Republicans are unvaccinated or only partially vaccinated and therefore not eligible for the new updated COVID-19 booster dose.
Vaccinated adults who have not yet gotten a dose of the bivalent COVID-19 booster cite a variety of reasons for not getting the updated booster; about four in ten (44%) say they do not think they need it and about a third (37%) say they do not think the benefit is worth it.
About a third (36%) say they have been too busy or have not had the time to get it, while about one in four (23%) say they have not gotten the updated booster because they had bad side effects from a previous COVID-19 vaccine dose.
About one in six (17%) vaccinated adults who have not gotten the updated booster say they have not done so because they are waiting to see if COVID-19 cases increase in their area, while 12% say they are waiting until before they travel or see vulnerable family and friends to get the updated booster.
Though public health officials have stressed the importance of the updated COVID-19 booster for older adults, who are more vulnerable to complications from a COVID infection, about one third (36%) of vaccinated adults ages 65 and older who have not yet gotten the booster say they don’t think they need it (36%) and a similar share say they don’t think the benefit of the updated booster is worth it.
About one in four (23%) vaccinated adults ages 65 and older say they have not gotten the updated booster because they have been too busy or have not had time to get it yet.
Notably, at least six in ten vaccinated Republicans or Republican leaning independents who have not yet gotten the updated booster say they haven’t done so because they don’t think they need it (64%) or do not think the benefit is worth it (61%).
Among vaccinated Democrats or Democratic-leaning independents who have not yet gotten the updated booster, the most common reason for not yet doing so is having been too busy or not having the time to get it (51%).
About one in four parents of teenagers ages 12 to 17 say their child has already gotten the updated COVID-19 booster (16%) or that they will definitely be doing so (8%).
A further 18% say their teen will probably get the update booster.
Notably, about four in ten parents of teenagers say their 12-17 year old is not vaccinated for COVID-19 and therefore not eligible to get the updated bivalent booster.
Among parents of younger children between the ages of 5 and 11, six in ten (61%) say their child is unvaccinated and therefore not eligible for the new COVID-19 booster.
About one in five parents say their 5 to 11 year old has either gotten the updated booster (14%) or will definitely be doing so (7%), while a further 9% say their child will probably get the updated booster.
As Covid-19 product sales dip, other profits remain healthy.
Credit: CROCOTHERY / Shutterstock.com.
Each week, Pharmaceutical Technology’s journalists pick out insights from company filings that highlight sentiments in our sector.
These filings signals are based on GlobalData’s analysis of earnings statements, call transcripts, investor presentations and sustainability reports.
They tell us about key topics on the minds of business leaders and investors, and the themes driving a company’s activities.
This new, thematic filings coverage is powered by our underlying Disruptor data which tracks all major deals, patents, company filings, hiring patterns and social media buzz across our sectors.
In the last week week, pharmaceutical giants including Takeda, AstraZeneca and Roche released their half-year earnings reports, and the numbers give cause for optimism.
Covid-19 profits continue to diminish as demand for vaccines wanes, but sales growth in other product areas remains strong enough to compensate.
This refocusing is reflected in the mentions of key industry themes within the filings of the three companies.
Continuing a trend from Q1, weakening Covid-19 sales are impacting profits, sometimes to the point of exclusion from growth figures.
AstraZeneca notes in its H1 report that total revenue was up 4%, but that figure jumps to 16% excluding Covid-19 medications.
Takeda reported a similar situation, with core operating profit up 2.3% in actual foreign exchange, but down 2% at constant exchange rate, which it attributes in part to Covid-19 product sales.
In its Q1 earnings call, CFO Costa Saroukos explained: “This decline reflects product mix due to generic entry and lower Covid-19 vaccine revenues and also continued investment in R&D and data”.
Roche Group’s core profit was in fact down 6%, driven predominantly by declining Covid-19 product sales, which fell by CHF 5bn ($5.75bn) in Q2.
Despite this, base business sales grew by 8%, indicating long-term sustainability, especially as a large portion of this growth was coming from new medication.
How well do you really know your competitors?
Access the most comprehensive Company Profiles on the market, powered by GlobalData.
Save hours of research.
Gain competitive edge.
View profiles in store Company Profile – free sample Thank you!
Your download email will arrive shortly Not ready to buy yet?
Download a free sample We are confident about the unique quality of our Company Profiles.
However, we want you to make the most beneficial decision for your business, so we offer a free sample that you can download by submitting the below form By GlobalData Submit Country * UK USA Afghanistan
Åland Islands Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina
Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos Islands Colombia Comoros Congo Democratic Republic of the Congo Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d"Ivoire Croatia Cuba Curaçao Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea
Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany
Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and McDonald Islands Holy See Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia
Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territory Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Réunion Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and The Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and The South Sandwich Islands Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Timor-Leste Togo
Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates US Minor Outlying Islands Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Vietnam British Virgin Islands US Virgin Islands Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Kosovo Industry *
Academia & Education Aerospace, Defense & Security Agriculture Asset Management Automotive Banking & Payments Chemicals Construction Consumer Foodservice Government, trade bodies and NGOs Health & Fitness Hospitals & Healthcare HR, Staffing & Recruitment Insurance Investment Banking Legal Services Management Consulting Marketing & Advertising Media & Publishing Medical Devices Mining Oil & Gas Packaging Pharmaceuticals Power & Utilities Private Equity Real Estate Retail Sport Technology Telecom Transportation & Logistics Travel, Tourism & Hospitality Venture Capital Tick here to opt out of curated industry news, reports, and event updates from Pharmaceutical Technology.
Submit and download Visit our Privacy Policy for more information about our services, how we may use, process and share your personal data, including information of your rights in respect of your personal data and how you can unsubscribe from future marketing communications.
Our services are intended for corporate subscribers and you warrant that the email address submitted is your corporate email address.
Declining Covid-19 product sales were inevitable as the global vaccination rate continues to increase and governmental funding for prevention tapers off.
The exceptional profits created during the pandemic provided big pharma companies with healthy cash reserves, and the return to normal operation appears to be going smoothly.
Another indicator of a healthy market is the mass investment in artificial intelligence (AI) that many of these companies are undertaking.
Of particular interest is Roche’s in-house language model that functions similarly to ChatGPT announced in early 2022.
By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy .
You can opt-out at any time.
Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go.
download the app
Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily.
Read preview
The severity of COVID-19 first struck President Donald Trump after an older, wealthy New York real-estate-developer friend got sick and was fighting for his life in the president's hometown hospital, Dr. Deborah Birx writes in a new memoir.
"Suddenly, this pandemic was not abstract to him, but very real and personal," Birx says in "Silent Invasion: The Untold Story of the Trump Administration, COVID-19, and Preventing the Next Pandemic Before It's Too Late.
"
This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers.
Become an Insider and start reading now.
As the global pandemic took off, Trump momentarily wrestled with his own mortality upon learning that the Crown Acquisitions founder Stanley Chera was deteriorating rapidly at Elmhurst Hospital in Queens, New York.
"I know that hospital.
What's going on there, it's horrible," Trump said after reviewing reports of the rising case counts in March 2020.
Advertisement
"President Trump described Chera as a friend and began publicly remarking on how vicious COVID-19 could be," Birx writes.
"I saw this as the president's recognizing that him not just in age — Chera was only a few years older — but also in similar economic circumstances couldn't count on wealth as a form of immunity.
"
Trump initially showed an aversion to adopting a strategy for slowing COVID-19's spread.
But the resistance melted away, Birx says, as she laid out the catastrophic outlook of not acting decisively.
Birx was trying to win Trump over on locking down the US for another 30 days to prevent hospitals from being overwhelmed.
When they spoke, the White House already had announced to the country that it needed "15 days to slow the spread.
"
"I'm certain that we're going to have fifty, a hundred, and potentially a thousand Elmhurst Hospitals," Birx said in her pitch to extend the shelter-in-place recommendations.
"We're going to see city after city looking like what New York does right now.
It will only get worse.
"
Advertisement
The optics of it all, she says, is what hit Trump the hardest.
"Do you mean there will be body bags there?
Refrigerated trucks?
Just like at Elmhurst?"
Trump asked as she presented him with projections of up to 200,000 COVID-19-related deaths by May 2020, according to the book.
Related stories
"Yes.
Mr. President.
Hundreds of hospitals," Birx said of the dire prognosis.
After briefly consulting with Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Trump agreed to tread cautiously for another month, Birx writes.
Advertisement
Chera died on April 11, 2020, at the age of 77.
"What mattered today was that the president — perhaps surprisingly to many — had done the right thing," Birx writes of Trump agreeing to the lockdown.
Trump's tone toward Birx changed after the lockdown was over
In the book, Birx gives Trump credit for agreeing to a voluntary nationwide shut down where the federal government encouraged people to avoid unnecessary travel or gathering in groups.
But he turned on her soon after it had begun, she says.
"We will never shut down the country again.
Never," he told her a few days into lockdown in early April 2020, according to the book.
Advertisement
"His pupils hardened into points of anger," Birx writes of the confrontation, adding: "I felt the blood drain from my face, and I shivered slightly.
"
Birx remembers the decision to shut down the country as the last time Trump appeared to take her advice or even acknowledge her.
She didn't know what changed Trump's mind, but later in the book, she writes that she suspected that the president had already been speaking with Dr. Scott Atlas.
Trump brought Atlas to the White House in August 2020, and in her book, Birx writes frequently about how she and he clashed.
Birx wanted strong mitigation measures that included testing, virtual work, social distancing, isolating, and masking, but Atlas wanted the US to focus only on older and vulnerable adults and to worry less about younger people getting infected.
Atlas had previously worked as a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution, a conservative-leaning think tank at Stanford University.
He was not an infectious-disease expert but told Birx that his approach was what the president wanted.
Advertisement
"I became a nonentity," Birx writes of her relationship with Trump.
"He appeared to find nothing useful in what I had to offer."
We've learned a lot about COVID-19 (and SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes it) since it first made global headlines.
The disease, which is spread via respiratory droplets, is highly transmissible.
Millions of Americans have had it—as have many more hundreds of millions worldwide—and it isn't going anywhere.
But the good news is that serious illness with COVID-19 can now mostly be avoided.
For people who are eligible, the COVID-19 vaccine can significantly reduce their risk of hospitalization, and there are medications that can reduce the severity of the disease should they get sick.
At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, there was some speculation about whether kids could catch or spread COVID-19.
It is now well-known that kids can and do get sick with COVID-19.
And they spread it just like anyone else—possibly even more so.
Read on to learn more about how COVID-19 is spread and how long children with COVID-19 are contagious.
How Is COVID-19 Spread?
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), COVID-19 is spread when an infected person releases respiratory droplets through coughing, sneezing, or breathing.
The most common way to become infected is to breathe in infected droplets through your mouth or nose.
More rarely, you can catch COVID-19 by touching an infected surface (like a counter or handrail) and touching your eyes, mouth, or nose.
That said, due to the incubation period of COVID-19 (the period between when the virus enters your body and you start experiencing symptoms) and the fact that many people are contagious days before showing symptoms, it can be hard to know when and how you were exposed.
Initially, the incubation period for COVID-19 was quite long, especially compared to other respiratory viruses, like the flu.
But over time, and as the virus mutated, the incubation period lessened.
According to the CDC, you are most contagious for the first five days after symptoms begin.
However, you can also potentially spread the virus a couple of days before you even know you are sick (during the incubation period).
How Long Are You Contagious With COVID-19?
Since COVID-19 was first discovered, experts have been studying the duration of the infection.
At first, people were told to isolate for 14 days—or two weeks—if infected.
Months later, that number dropped to 10 days.
Currently, the recommended isolation period is a minimum of 5 days but can be longer.
So how long are you actually contagious with COVID-19?
According to the CDC, this window of time depends on the severity of your infection and your symptoms.
It's this understanding that has shaped the CDC's guidelines for quarantine and isolation.
Quarantine guidelines for exposure
As the COVID-19 virus has evolved and health officials' understanding of the virus has increased, so have quarantine and isolation guidelines.
Quarantining (staying home if exposed to COVID-19) is no longer recommended, but taking precautions after a known exposure is.
The CDC advises the following when you have been exposed to COVID-19:
Isolation guidelines for illness
Isolation means separating yourself from others, including people in your household.
If you test positive for COVID-19, the CDC's isolation guidelines are as follows:
Stay home for at least five days and isolate yourself from others.
If asymptomatic, you may end isolation after five days.
If you had a mild case, your symptoms are improving, and you've been fever-free for 24 hours, you may end isolation after five days; otherwise, continue isolating until you meet those criteria.
If you have a moderate or severe case, continue isolating for 10 days.
These guidelines apply to everyone of all ages, including children.
Since young kids need hands-on care, you and your child (if they are able) should wear a mask when you interact to limit your chances of catching COVID-19.
Always speak with a health care provider if you're unsure about your child's contagiousness or symptoms.
Can You Get COVID-19 More Than Once?
The short answer is yes.
Early on in the pandemic, there was a question as to whether having COVID-19 provided long-term immunity against the virus.
It is now known that neither infection nor vaccination offers long-term immunity.
You can be infected multiple times, even if you are vaccinated.
Vaccination does, however, significantly reduce the chance of a severe infection.
The good news is that COVID-19 infection does appear to offer some short-term immunity that dwindles over time.
A 2023 study in the Lancet found that after COVID-19 infection, people had high levels of protection from infection, symptomatic illness, and severe illness for as long as 10 months.
According to the CDC, if you become reinfected with COVID-19, you are contagious, just as you would be with an initial infection.
How Do Kids Affect COVID-19 Transmission?
So it's clear kids can catch COVID-19.
But are they spreading it at the same rate as adults, especially when not showing symptoms?
Researchers say yes, and maybe even more so.
For example, a 2022 study found that while kids, teens, and adults had equal chances of contracting the virus during the pre-vaccine era of the pandemic, kids under 13 were more likely to be infected but not have symptoms.
This could be one reason younger kids were more likely to transmit the virus.
Kids with mild or no symptoms may be more likely to continue on with their usual activities, exposing more people to the virus than those who get sick and stay home.
Researchers in the study observed that younger age was the most significant risk factor for COVID-19 transmission within the household.
They speculate this is because younger kids interact more closely with other household members than older kids and teens.
What's more, young kids may spread COVID-19 more readily because of various lifestyle factors.
For example, they might play closely with other children in daycare or school.
They're constantly in contact with caregivers, and they're not as careful with hygiene (think: covering coughs and sneezes and regularly washing hands).
It's unclear how these factors affect transmission statistics.
What Should You Do If Your Child Tests Positive for COVID-19?
If your child tests positive for COVID-19, they should isolate at home immediately, following the CDC guidelines.
In addition, you should reach out to a health care provider.
Even though most cases in children are mild, serious illnesses can happen.
Kids might experience the following common COVID-19 symptoms:
Cough
Congestion
Fatigue
Loss of smell or taste
Headaches
Fever
Vomiting
Diarrhea
A health care provider should advise you about whether your child's symptoms are expected and what you should be on the lookout for.
PULLMAN, Wash.– An early pandemic survey found that respondents’ intentions to receive COVID-19 vaccines were linked more to their media literacy and opinion of health experts than knowledge of the virus or previous vaccination behavior.
In the study, published in the American Journal of Health Promotion, Washington State University researchers also found that for respondents who had recently refused a flu vaccine, higher COVID-19 knowledge actually correlated with lower future vaccine intentions.
“We have known for some time that knowledge and previous behavior can provide helpful clues to what people will do, but that is often insufficient to reliably predict behavior,” said Erica Austin, director of the WSU Murrow Center for Media and Health Promotion.
“What we found was that measurements of trust in experts, the ability to identify reliable media sources and the ability to critically evaluate those media sources were more powerful predictors than either previous vaccine behavior or previous knowledge.”
For this study, the researchers conducted an online survey of 1,264 U.S. adults.
The results indicate that people were engaging in what’s called motivated reasoning: the psychological process by which people consciously and selectively use facts to lead to a conclusion that reinforces their desired beliefs rather than rationally analyzing the evidence.
According to the authors, such processes are heavily influenced by the constantly changing news environment.
It is a maze of information, misinformation, which is unintentionally incorrect, and disinformation, which is intentionally false.
“There are people out there who are motivated to take that little bit of misinformation and build a whole bunch of misinformation or even disinformation to try to sell you an idea or product based around it,” Austin said.
“Most often they’re selling you both, but they’re probably not out there to do something good for you; they’re usually out there to do something that’s good for themselves.”
The results have important implications for health promotion practice and research, Austin added.
It highlights the significance of individuals’ attempts to independently verify information and the need to cultivate their trust in health experts.
The researchers also recommend that public health campaigns make sure to respect individuals’ freedom to make decisions for themselves while helping them make those decisions based on accurate information from credible sources.
In addition to Austin, co-authors on the study include Bruce Austin from WSU’s College of Education, Porismita Borah and Shawn Domgaard from WSU’s Murrow College of Communication as well as Sterling McPherson from WSU’s Elson S. Floyd College of Medicine.
An interview discussing this research can be seen below:
Testing Speed
Strengthening laboratory infrastructure:
The Missouri State Public Health Laboratory increased disease testing capacity and speed
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the team at the Missouri State Public Health Laboratory (MSPHL) found themselves desperately looking for ways to improve response times and efficiencies across the board.
Team members wanted to increase testing capacity at rates and in ways that the current resources couldn’t handle.
The key to keeping up with testing demand was to automate manual processes and scan single samples for multiple viruses at one time.
Randy Schillers, laboratory manager for the Virology Unit within the MSPHL, describes the ability to test for more than one organism as breaking the gap.
"We were able to purchase machinery that could perform things fast, accurate, and, for some of our equipment, a broader spectrum," Schillers explained.
"Yes, you are looking for COVID-19, but what if it wasn’t?
We now have the ability to test for things beyond just one organism.
"
The Virology Unit expanded its testing through two new machines.
The BioFire Troch FilmArray system includes batch testing for respiratory organisms, gastrointestinal bacteria and even some parasite testing.
The DiaSorin Liaison XL machine can condense multiple testing systems and allow for increased speeds of around 170 samples an hour for some tests.
New York state health officials signaled Wednesday a requirement that health care workers receive the COVID-19 vaccination will end as pandemic-era rules more broadly are expiring.
The announcement comes after years of legal challenges to the vaccine requirement, which resulted in health care workers who refused to receive the vaccine losing their jobs as a result.
“Due to the changing landscape of the COVID-19 pandemic and evolving vaccine recommendations, the New York State Department of Health has begun the process of repealing the COVID-19 vaccine requirement for workers at regulated health care facilities," the state Department of Health said in a statement.
"Throughout the public health emergency, this vaccine requirement served as a critical public health tool, helping to protect both health care workers and the patients under their care.
"
The rule was first put in place in August 2021 by then-Gov. Andrew Cuomo.
After COVID-19 emergency orders lapsed in 2022, the state Dpeartment of Health adopted the requirement as a formal regulation.
While the rule will no longer be enforced, individual health care facilities will be able to continue to implement their own internal policies for COVID-19 vaccination, the Department of Health said.
The regulation's repeal also comes as the state is facing a mounting health care worker shortage in many regions, with hospitals sounding an alarm over an expiring rule that allowed the state to bring in out-of-state health care workers.
CureVac N.V. (Nasdaq: CVAC), a global biopharmaceutical company developing a new class of transformative medicines based on messenger ribonucleic acid (“mRNA”), today announced positive extended preliminary data from ongoing Phase 1 clinical programs in COVID-19 and seasonal flu conducted in collaboration with GSK.
The newly reported data focus on older adult age groups in both indications.
Detailed data can be reviewed in the associated presentation.
The data further support the decision to advance updated versions of the modified mRNA COVID-19 and flu vaccine constructs to the next stage of clinical testing in 2023.
“The exciting preliminary data seen among older adults for our COVID-19 and flu programs significantly add to the validation of our technology platform into this highly relevant and at-risk population,” said Franz-Werner Haas, Chief Executive Officer of CureVac.
“The strong immune responses we observed in both indications further support our commitment to advancing to the next stage of product development in 2023.”
COVID-19 Program
Newly reported immunogenicity data from CV0501 in older adults (age ≥65) are based on the fully recruited dose groups of 12, 25 and 50µg, consisting of 10 subjects per dose.
They show relevant titers of neutralizing antibodies beginning at the lowest tested dose.
On day 29 at the 12µg dose level, CV0501 generated a ratio of post-boost to pre-boost serum neutralizing titers against BA.1 of 13.3.
While CV0501 encodes the Omicron BA.1 variant, a Phase 2 clinical study, expected to start later in 2023, will assess monovalent and/or bivalent vaccine candidates designed to target clinically relevant variants.
Seasonal Flu Program
A single dose of Flu-SV-mRNA (dose level undisclosed) was assessed for safety and reactogenicity in older adults (age 60-80) and was observed to be safe and well tolerated with no grade 3 adverse events in the 32 subjects who were administered the mRNA construct.
Immunogenicity of Flu-SV-mRNA was assessed in parallel with a licensed seasonal flu vaccine comparator.
Adjusted geometric mean hemagglutinin inhibition antibody titers elicited by Flu-SV-mRNA in older adults were approximately 2.3 times those elicited by the licensed vaccine comparator.
In the same age group, the percentage of subjects achieving seroconversion 1) was 89.7% for Flu-SV-mRNA and 56.2% for the licensed flu vaccine comparator.
The vaccine candidate for future clinical development is expected to target all four flu virus strains currently recommended by the WHO for influenza vaccines.
A Phase 1/2 study for multivalent vaccine candidates is expected to start around mid-2023.
Previously discussed preliminary results in younger adults for the COVID-19 and flu programs can be reviewed via the conference call and webcast materials archived on January 6, 2023, on the Events section on the CureVac homepage.
The CureVac/GSK infectious disease collaboration was first announced in July 2020.
It focuses on the development of new products based on CureVac’s mRNA technology for different targets in the field of infectious diseases.
The collaboration was extended in February 2021 to also include jointly developed vaccine candidates for COVID-19.
In 2022, the companies broadened their development strategy to test modified mRNA in addition to unmodified mRNA.
[1] Defined as the percentage of participants who either have a HI pre-dose antibody titer < 1:10 and a post-dose titer ≥ 1:40 or a pre-dose HI antibody titer ≥ 1:10 and at least a 4-fold increase in post-dose titer.
“We cannot say we are learning to live with COVID-19 when one million people have died with COVID-19 this year alone, when we are two-and-a-half years into the pandemic and have all the tools necessary to prevent these deaths,” said Tedros, speaking during his regular briefing from Geneva.
Tweet URL .@WHO media briefing on #Ukraine, #monkeypox, #COVID19 and other global health issues https://t.co/MxCoto471f Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus DrTedros
He again urged all governments to step up action to vaccinate all health workers, older persons, and others at highest risk, as part of efforts towards inoculating 70 per cent of the global population.
Progress for priority groups
Tedros said he was pleased to see that some countries with the lowest vaccination rates are now gaining ground, especially in Africa.
In January, WHO and partners launched the COVID-19 Vaccine Delivery Partnership, focused mainly on the 34 countries that were at or below 10 per cent coverage.
All but six are on the continent.
Today, only 10 countries still have less than 10 per cent coverage, most of which are facing humanitarian emergencies.
Vaccinations still lagging
Although welcoming progress on coverage of high-priority groups, Tedros stressed that more must be done as one-third of the world’s population remains unvaccinated.
This includes two-thirds of health workers, and three-quarters of older persons in low-income countries.
“All countries at all income levels must do more to vaccinate those most at risk, to ensure access to life-saving therapeutics, to continue testing and sequencing, and to set tailored, proportionate policies to limit transmission and save lives.
This is the best way to drive a truly sustainable recovery,” he said.
©
Harun Tulunay A man recovers from monkeypox at a hospital in London, UK.
Monkeypox reversal
Meanwhile, intense Monkeypox transmission continues in the Americas region, although the number of cases globally fell by more than 20 per cent last week.
While most cases in the early stage of the outbreak were in Europe, with a smaller proportion in the Americas, the situation has now reversed.
Currently, less than 40 per cent of reported cases are in Europe and 60 per cent are in the Americas.
There are signs that the outbreak is slowing in Europe, Tedros reported, where a combination of effective public health measures, behaviour change, and vaccination, are helping to prevent transmission.
“However, in Latin America in particular, insufficient awareness or public health measures are combining with a lack of access to vaccines to fan the flames of the outbreak,” he said.
Tedros thanked vaccine manufacturer Bavarian Nordic, which on Wednesday signed an agreement with WHO’s Regional Office for the Americas to support access to its Monkeypox vaccine in Latin America and the Caribbean.
He expressed hope that the development will help to bring the outbreak under control in the region.
We leveraged the existing healthcare system infrastructure to collect and analyze aggregated patient-level EHR data from patients with COVID-19 and control patients across five countries to begin to better define PASC phenotypes using a well-validated common data model.
In addition to the expected higher incidence of pulmonary conditions as well as malaise and fatigue, we observed that hospitalized patients with COVID-19 had a greater risk of new cardiovascular and neurological conditions when compared to inpatient controls.
Additionally, patients diagnosed with COVID-19 in the outpatient setting had a greater risk of new embolic and thrombotic conditions, hypertension, atrial fibrillation, neurological conditions, and disorders of smell and taste.
Our federated approach is in contrast to prior efforts to characterize PASC phenotypes using a prevalence of symptoms and diagnoses, which, in the absence of appropriate non-COVID-19 patient control groups, could not be meaningfully interpreted, and is in contrast to multicenter centralized analyses with smaller sample sizes19.
This study used a federated approach, in which standardized and straightforward database queries were distributed to sites to run locally on their EHR data, and only aggregate counts and statistics were shared externally.
This approach lowered regulatory barriers, streamlined the institutional review board (IRB) approval process at sites, and enabled sites to contribute to the analyses with minimal resources.
Using this approach, we obtained a broad data-driven view of PASC across different countries, healthcare systems, patient populations, and time periods, and systematically examined all medical conditions across the different comparison groups.
Central to our consortium effort is the ability of each local site to perform quality control by its own data scientists and clinicians.
Other consortia, including Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI) and Patient-Centered Clinical Research Network (PCORNet), have had similar success with federated EHR data networks24,25.
A tradeoff for a large number of participating sites is the more limited ability to perform complex analyses.
This contrasts with single data repositories such as the National COVID Cohort Collaborative26.
Our results indicate a possible high burden of long-term sequelae in patients recovering from SARS-CoV-2 infection.
We observed a wide spectrum of PASC-related conditions not only in inpatient COVID-19 cases but also in outpatient cases.
This supports the emerging evidence that even patients who did not experience severe disease requiring hospitalization during the acute period may experience long-term complications27,28.
The similar PASC profiles between both the inpatient and outpatient COVID-19 cohorts suggest common underlying etiologic pathways in the development of PASC.
We identified general symptoms that persist after initial infection, including malaise and fatigue, respiratory abnormalities, dysphagia, and loss of smell and taste, all of which are consistent with what is reported in the literature8,29,30.
We additionally observed increased incidences of organ-specific dysfunction among patients with COVID-19, primarily involving dysfunction of the lungs, heart, and brain.
Possible explanations for our findings include previously undiagnosed chronic conditions, adverse effects from treatments for SARS-CoV-2, and dysregulated inflammatory or hypercoagulable responses arising from SARS-CoV-2 infection31,32.
We observed that outpatient COVID-19 cases were at higher risk for thromboembolic events compared to controls, including both pulmonary embolism and venous thromboembolism.
While there have been observational studies reporting high incidences of pulmonary embolisms in COVID-19 patients, most of these studies lacked appropriate control groups33,34.
Interestingly, a recent study of 74,418 patients from 62 healthcare institutions reported a ninefold increased risk of pulmonary embolism among patients presenting to the emergency department with COVID-19-related pneumonia when compared to non-COVID-19 patients35.
Moreover, venous thromboembolism incidence of up to 20% has been reported in COVID-19 inpatients, although again, the lack of appropriate inpatient controls limits the interpretation of these data36.
Thus, our study confirms prior observational data that COVID-19 may be associated with an increased risk of thromboembolic events compared to non-COVID-19 patients in the outpatient setting.
Unexpectedly, we did not find any significant associations of pulmonary embolism or venous thromboembolism in the COVID-19 inpatient group.
One possible reason may be the use of prophylactic anticoagulation in the inpatient setting37,38.
While these results may suggest a possible role for anticoagulation in patients with mild COVID-19 symptoms, a recent trial did not demonstrate any clinical benefit of anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy in this population39.
Our results support emerging evidence that patients hospitalized with COVID-19 may be at increased risk for cardiac conditions including heart failure.
Acute myocardial injury and elevated cardiac serum biomarker levels have been observed in COVID-19 patients and associated with severe COVID-19 and worse outcomes40,41,42,43,44.
Prior observational cohort studies have reported new-onset heart failure in patients admitted with COVID-19-related pneumonia, including in patients with no prior history of congestive cardiac failure45,46,47.
It is plausible that a new diagnosis of congestive cardiac failure in the post-acute period could suggest cardiomyopathy from systemic inflammatory responses in the setting of SARS-CoV-2 infection, direct SARS-CoV-2 myocardial infarction leading to myocarditis and eventual cardiac fibrosis, or as sequelae of severe COVID-19 predisposed by underlying cardiovascular comorbidities47,48,49,50,51,52,53.
Furthermore, pulmonary hypertension and mechanical ventilation in COVID-19 patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome could contribute to right ventricular strain and decompensated heart failure in the long term54,55,56,57.
Consistent with prior reports of subclinical myocardial injury who have recovered from recent COVID-19, we found higher incidences of angina pectoris and cardiac arrhythmias in inpatient and outpatient COVID-19 patients compared to controls58.
These findings support emerging pathological studies that observed increased intramyocardial microthrombi in COVID-19 patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction compared to controls59.
Among the neurological sequelae of COVID-19 patients, we noted consistent associations of increased risk of cognitive dysfunction and malaise in both COVID-19 inpatient and outpatient cohorts.
Previous studies have hypothesized that cognitive dysfunction could be due to several reasons, including severe systemic inflammation, neuroinflammation, or complications of chronic illnesses during acute COVID-1960,61,62.
Our observation of increased incidence of cognitive dysfunction, as well as malaise and fatigue, could be consistent with a myalgic encephalitis-like syndrome that have been proposed in prior reports of patients with post-acute sequelae63,64.
While we also observed an increased risk for dementia, we should interpret this finding with caution given the typical long duration for the development of neurodegenerative conditions.
We observed changes in the incidence of sequelae in the inpatient and outpatient COVID-19 cohorts across ~15 months of the pandemic from early 2020 to early 2021.
While the findings of decreasing incidence of cardiovascular and pulmonary conditions in the inpatient COVID-19 cohort may suggest improved patient management, this interpretation warrants caution and further validation.
Interestingly, the incidence of metabolic conditions and sensory dysfunction (i.e., disorders of smell and taste) increased over time in both the inpatient and outpatient cohorts.
While this could be due to changes in COVID-19 pathophysiology, an alternative explanation is that clinicians started to screen and document such conditions more systematically over time.
Finally, in contrast to previous literature, we did not observe any significant changes over time in gastrointestinal or dermatological PASC phenotypes19.
Further studies accounting for viral variants and administration of vaccines are needed to study trends in PASC incidence and mortality over different waves of the pandemic.
While the inpatient COVID-19 cases appeared to develop these new conditions after their positive SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, these observations may be due to confounding and other types of bias.
Compared to inpatient controls, the inpatient COVID-19 cases had worse preexisting health as evidenced by a higher baseline prevalence of pulmonary conditions, heart failure, chronic kidney disease, type 2 diabetes, and obesity.
This cohort was also likely sicker on average compared to the inpatient controls, as they had a higher incidence of acute kidney injury and hypovolemia within the first 29 days of the index date.
Outpatient COVID-19 cases had fewer preexisting comorbidities, i.e., only a higher prevalence of obesity and depression than outpatient controls.
This study has numerous limitations.
First, we included only patients who were tested for SARS-CoV-2 in participating healthcare systems.
As we were unable to ascertain the indications for hospital admission or SARS-CoV-2 testing, we could not completely mitigate selection bias or misclassification bias in cohort identification.
While the inclusion of control cohorts is a major strength, we also could not ascertain the indication for control patients who were hospitalized or tested for SARS-CoV-2.
Second, among the participating healthcare systems, only two non-U.S. sites could contribute control data.
Third, given the limited scope of the common data capture and shared aggregate data, we could not control for patient-level potentially confounding variables such as comorbidities, medications, and other societal and environmental factors, all of which may induce bias.
Accordingly, we were unable to stratify our analyses by demographic groups to further study PASC profiles.
However, we note that risk ratio analyses were conducted using first occurrences of diagnosis codes, which better account for existing conditions among patients and make it more likely these are actually new diagnoses.
Fourth, the study likely has several time-dependent biases: (1) not all patients had the same follow-up time in the study period, particularly in the late-stage period (90+ days after the index date); (2) we could not account for competing risks such as from death; (3) diagnosis codes may have been subject to censoring (transfer, discharge, death, and other loss to follow up) and thus dropout bias.
Fifth, EHR data can have quality and completeness problems, especially for recent data, due to coding lag and pre-final codes.
The degree to which this might have biased our analyses is likely the greatest in the final 2021-Q1 time period and depends on when individual hospitals ran their local database queries.
Considering the aforementioned limitations, we caution against strong inferences from this study, which can identify associations and not identify mechanisms nor assess causality.
In future studies, we plan to leverage patient-level EHR data to better mitigate many of these biases and investigate PASC profiles between patients of varying demographic groups.
The Associated Press is an independent global news organization dedicated to factual reporting.
Founded in 1846, AP today remains the most trusted source of fast, accurate, unbiased news in all formats and the essential provider of the technology and services vital to the news business.
More than half the world’s population sees AP journalism every day.
An electron microscope image of cells infected with the omicron strain of SARS-CoV-2, shown in orange.
NIAID Integrated Research Facility 2022
On Sept. 18, President Biden famously said “the pandemic is over.”
He very quickly followed that up by saying: “We are doing a lot of work on it.”
These notions may sound contradictory, but they are indeed the way to approach the concept of endemicity; combating COVID-19 will take ongoing and hard work.
More on coronavirus: Nearly every part of society has returned to normal after COVID.
Except for this
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
Saying we are exiting the emergency phase, which the World Health Organization also signaled in September, does not mean COVID is over.
Unfortunately, COVID will never be over.
This virus is not eradicable.
Smallpox was successfully eradicated worldwide in 1979, not only because of the vaccine but because of some unique characteristics of the virus, including its lack of an animal reservoir, pathogenic features that made it easy to quickly recognize in those who have the disease and a short period of infectiousness.
Smallpox infection also conferred natural immunity for life.
SARS-CoV-2, which causes COVID-19, has none of these features.
It is found in 29 species of animals, at least, which means we will always be dealing with COVID in the medical system.
In August, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released its latest guidelines for COVID-19, which dramatically streamlined the approach to protecting oneself and to understanding personal risk.
These guidelines acknowledged the prevalence of natural immunity and no longer distinguished between vaccinated and unvaccinated in isolation and quarantine recommendations.
Asymptomatic testing was no longer recommended.
Masking in health care settings was no longer recommended as of September if community transmission levels were low.
As is always the case with new guidelines, the response from experts was mixed.
Some agreed that it was time to learn to live with the virus with minimal disruptions to life while others pointed out that the daily death toll was still unacceptably high — and that public health involves sacrifices for the greater good.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
It has since become clear, however, that many hospitalizations officially counted as caused by the coronavirus were actually of patients who happen to be infected but were admitted for other reasons.
That almost certainly remains true with the host of highly transmissible new variants like XBB.1.5, the so-called “Kraken” variant.
Because everyone admitted to most hospitals is still routinely tested for the coronavirus (despite the main U.S. infection control organization recommending against this practice), many patients admitted for other ailments also test positive.
This inflates the official number of COVID-19 hospitalizations.
Miscategorized hospitalizations lead to miscategorized deaths.
An analysis of Los Angeles County + USC Medical Center data found that less than one-third of official hospitalizations attributed to COVID were meaningfully related to the coronavirus.
In Massachusetts, over 70% of “COVID” hospitalizations are similarly “with” rather than “for” COVID-19.
This of course is consistent with the fact that over 95% of Americans have been infected and/or vaccinated.
The resulting strong population immunity coupled with the less-virulent nature of omicron strains is resulting in much less severe clinical outcomes.
Overcounting hospitalizations and deaths from COVID in the U.S. due to antiquated screening policies can sow discord and differing recommendations across the country in terms of boosters and masks.
However, when public health rules differ from county to county and state to state — and more importantly when they don’t seem to make sense — trust in public health suffers.
In May 2021, only about half of Americans trusted the CDC, according to a Robert S. Woods Foundation/Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health poll.
By January 2022, an NBC News poll found that only 44% of Americans trusted the health agency, and by March 2022, a Gallup poll put the level of trust at 32%.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
We are now seeing the untoward effects of that mistrust; it is impacting the uptake of vaccines for COVID and, more recently, other vaccine-preventable diseases, including influenza, measles and polio.
A lack of public trust in health experts has other costs, including avoidance of medical care, which may have a more dangerous impact on communities of color.
Without a unified and trustworthy public health voice, divisiveness continues to characterize the discourse around COVID in our country at a time when we need to unite in our efforts to repair the educational, financial and health damages incurred during the pandemic.
Local, state and federal public health officials desperately need to find and speak with such a unified voice.
Officials not only need to tell the public what it should do in order to prevent morbidity and mortality from COVID-19, but what it must stop doing in order to prevent the negative consequences of the very mitigation strategies that we employed in the early days of the pandemic.
Despite the recent scary headlines about XBB.1.5 and other new variants, there has long been, and remains, a profound decoupling of cases and deaths.
The pandemic has taken a terrible toll, but the public health outlook is improving drastically, owing to our miraculous and life-saving vaccines, high rates of immunity and a plentiful supply of effective therapies (including Paxlovid).
Given that the pandemic has changed, scientific knowledge has changed and the level of risk has changed, policies must change as well.
I propose five ways to keep us in the endemic phase, relatively consistent with CDC guidelines:
Retire quarantines
Prior post-exposure quarantine recommendations differentiated between those who were and those not up-to-date on vaccination.
This is simply not scientifically accurate today, given the degree of natural immunity in the population.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
Because the CDC stopped recommending universal contact tracing long ago, the brunt of post-exposure quarantine policies fell on settings like daycare centers, where careful case monitoring was occurring, resulting in disproportionate impacts on the socialization and education of children and the earnings of women, single parents and lower-income individuals.
Mindful of these issues, in May, Massachusetts ended quarantines in daycares, schools and camps.
Its guidance for the new school year was clear: “No asymptomatic person should be excluded from school as a result of exposure, regardless of vaccination status or exposure setting.”
All locales should adopt this rational approach and retire quarantines.
Stop asymptomatic testing
Asymptomatic testing frustrates families when positive tests, sometimes representing remote infection or a false positive, lead to missed school and important events.
A major erosion of public trust occurred during the winter omicron wave of 2022 when the general public struggled to access testing — which was and remains critical for high-risk individuals to qualify for life-saving treatments like Paxlovid — while colleges maintained multiple-time-per-week testing programs for low-risk students.
Asymptomatic testing in educational settings was a critical tool early in the pandemic to better understand transmission patterns and to provide reassurance to families and educators.
But it is time to retire these programs.
Although the CDC endorses this policy in general, the new school guidance asks for the resumption of asymptomatic testing when community levels are high, a practice that will continue to be disruptive.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
End all mask mandates
Masks have been the most polarizing intervention of the pandemic.
CDC guidelines recommend universal masking during times of high community transmission.
But the time has come to put mask mandates behind us.
Paradoxically, masks work but mask mandates do not.
Shorter isolation periods
For those who become sick due to COVID, a five-day isolation period recommended by the CDC still seems prudent.
But as population immunity continues to build, we should look to transition to a shorter time frame followed by masking and eventually a “stay home when sick” model.
This recommendation needs to be accompanied by national paid sick leave policies.
Boosters for some, but not all
Public health officials need to tout the amazing success of vaccines at preventing severe disease while simultaneously acknowledging their shortcomings in preventing infection and transmission.
They should also better publicly recognize the power of immunity from prior infection.
That means discouraging booster mandates in places with low-risk populations like schools, colleges and universities.
Boosters should instead be strongly encouraged for older individuals.
Vaccine mandates and passports made sense earlier in the pandemic when the vaccines were highly protective against asymptomatic and symptomatic infection.
That has changed.
We must be responsive and willing to change recommendations based on new knowledge.
Key Takeaways A sore throat is a common COVID-19 symptom, but it can also be caused by other respiratory illnesses and bacterial infections.
You might feel a scratchy sensation or a sharp pain.
You can try to manage a sore throat with OTC pain medications like Tylenol and Advil.
Salt water gargles can also help provide relief.
If you have a sore throat, you might wonder whether it’s allergies, the start of a COVID-19 infection, or the flu.
Unfortunately, it’s not that easy to tell the difference.
People have reported feeling a range of sensations with a COVID sore throat, from scratchy and irritated to a sharp pain that makes swallowing difficult.
Bacterial infections, such as strep throat, can also cause sore throat, so it’s impossible to diagnose your condition just based on the sore throat symptom alone, said Graham Snyder, MD, MS, medical director of infection prevention and hospital epidemiology at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.
The best thing to do when you have a sore throat is to get tested for COVID, Snyder added.
You may still find rapid tests at your local healthcare centers and pharmacies.
What If You Have a Sore Throat But Test Negative for COVID?
If you only plan to test once, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends taking a PCR test.
At-home rapid tests are a fine option, especially if you have some non-expired ones lying around, but the result may not be as accurate as a PCR test.
Getting a negative result from an over-the-counter rapid test may not mean you’re in the clear.
“I don’t know how good these tests are yet against some of the newer subvariants that we’re seeing emerging,” said Connie Savor Price, MD, chief medical officer at Denver Health and a professor specializing in infectious diseases at the University of Colorado School of Medicine.
But having a sore throat doesn’t guarantee that you’re infected with COVID.
If you do test negative, but still have symptoms, Price said it’s best to stay home and rest.
“You don’t want to spread any virus to another person unnecessarily,” she said.
How Can You Soothe a Sore Throat at Home?
You can try to manage a sore throat with OTC pain medications, such as Tylenol (acetaminophen) or Advil (ibuprofen).
Certain at-home remedies may also help.
“Salt water gargles are also a good way to get symptom relief.
The gargle will draw fluid out of the tissues in the throat and help reduce some of the inflammation,” Linda Yancey, MD, an infectious disease specialist at Memorial Hermann Health System in Houston, told Verywell in an email.
It’s best to check with your healthcare provider to determine the right course of treatment since the treatment options can vary based on what’s causing the sore throat, according to Snyder.
“For example, treatment for allergies may include an antihistamine, and antibiotics will only be effective for bacterial Streptococcus infection,” Snyder said.
If you’re infected with COVID, Snyder recommends soothing your sore throat by staying hydrated and keeping your throat moist.
You can take lozenges, use a humidifier, or sip on hot tea.
The COVID-19 pandemic (hereafter COVID-19 or COVID for brevity) has impacted the personal and professional lives of people worldwide.
Here, we study the impact of COVID-19 on the field of astronomy, using public records of astronomical publications from 1950 to February 2022, which includes 2 years during which research worldwide was disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Astronomy has well-organized and digitalized publication records, making it possible to trace historical trends.
Most articles are published as preprints with little delay between the time of production and the time of appearance on the database.
In addition, astronomy follows a by-contribution author ordering, making it relatively straightforward to quantify individual authors’ contributions.
In addition, we study the impact of COVID-19 on gender gaps in astronomy.
Pre-COVID, large gender gaps already existed in the science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields1 and astronomy was no exception2,3,4,5.
The long-term causes for women to quit science, technology, engineering and mathematics jobs—workplace discrimination, lack of encouragement to advance their careers, lack of support in balancing work and family, and lack of role models6—might have been amplified during COVID (see, for example, 7,8,9,10,11).
Earlier work by ref.
12 on US- and Europe-based scientists showed that female scientists and scientists with young children are disproportionately affected by COVID-19, resulting in 5% and 17% larger declines than men in research time, respectively.
Despite the fact that institutes have relaxed their rules to help early-career scientists cope with COVID-19, ref. 13 reported that many intended gender-neutral responses, such as work-from-home provisions and extensions on evaluations, may in fact have exacerbated underlying gender inequalities in academic sciences, engineering and medicine.
Finally, we study the impact of COVID-19 by country.
Policy makers in different countries have implemented drastically different responses to the pandemic, such as stay-home orders, border restrictions, mask wearing, testing and contact tracing, vaccination, financial support and relief, and school and workplace closures14.
We expect these measures to have varied impacts on the local scientific community.
Within the Italian astronomical community, the submission to arXiv from women is significantly under average for 2020 with respect to the previous years, while that from men is larger by up to 10% (3.5σ)15.
Similarly, women, researchers on short-term contracts such as PhD students and postdocs, parents and expatriates are particularly impacted by COVID-19 in the French astronomical community16.
Overall output in astronomy
We show in Fig.
1 the overall output in the field of astronomy, quantified as the total number of papers per year.
The top panel shows the total number of all (refereed + non-refereed) papers per year since 2005.
For 2022, we project the full-year output by dividing the number of papers published so far by the fraction of the year passed at the time of data download, shown as dotted lines.
We note that publications in astronomy likely have seasonal effects due to job seasons, grant application deadlines and school calendars, so the simple projection here should be taken with caution.
The Poisson errors are at the sub-per cent level (nearly invisible if shown), and hence the fluctuations seen here are likely not random.
Fig.
1: Number of papers in astronomy per year.
In the top panel we show all publications in black and refereed publications in grey.
We only include refereed papers for the past 10 years, as the journal review process usually takes only a few months.
In the bottom panel we show the fraction of papers written each year by female first authors.
The dotted lines are projections using partial-year data from 2022.
The Poisson errors are at the sub-per cent level (nearly invisible if shown), and hence the fluctuations seen here are likely non-random.
Full size image
We see a general trend of an increasing number of papers several years before COVID-19, roughly from 2014.
The first 2 years with COVID— 2020 and 2021—saw no decrease in the number of papers.
We verify this trend by analysing only refereed papers, shown as the grey line.
We only include refereed papers for the past 10 years, as the journal review process usually takes only a few months.
For refereed papers, which are roughly 80% of all papers, the upward trend remains, though it is milder.
Considering that many authors who submitted their papers to journals did not post their preprints, and the likely delayed referee process during COVID, the refereed curve likely reflects the lower limit.
Therefore, we conclude that the field of astronomy has been more productive during COVID than pre-COVID.
In the bottom panel of Fig. 1, we show the fraction of papers written by female first authors.
Because we have a large number (30%) of gender-unidentified authors, we compute the fraction of female authors using f Female =
N Female /(N
Female + N Male ) instead of N Female /N total .
The fraction of woman-led papers (~20%) has seen little to no change in the past 10 years, demonstrating a persistent gender gap in astronomy.
The increase in overall output in the field could be due to an increase in new researchers and/or an increase in individual productivity.
We investigate the exact sources of the increase below.
Incoming new researchers
We expect that COVID-19 has had a more severe impact on junior researchers.
Early-career researchers (students, postdocs and pre-tenure faculty) tend to have a smaller scientific network, fewer job securities and are more likely to have young children.
They are hence more vulnerable than more senior, especially tenured, researchers during a crisis.
We study the number of incoming new researchers each year.
We define new researchers as those who publish their first paper in a given year, disregarding their author order.
Our data do not distinguish the career stages at publication.
We show the number of new authors per year in the top panel of Fig.
2.
The Poisson errors are at the per cent level, and hence any fluctuations seen are likely associated with socioeconomic changes.
Compared to before 2020, we see an increase in new authors in recent years.
However, as we will show later, the increase during COVID is largely driven by only a handful of countries in Asia.
The majority of countries, including the USA and all European countries, experienced a drop in the number of new authors during COVID.
Fig.
2: Number of new authors in astronomy per year.
In the top panel we show the total number of new authors and in the bottom panel the fraction of women among them.
The dotted lines are projections using partial-year data from 2022.
The Poisson errors are at the per cent level (nearly invisible if shown), and hence the fluctuations seen here are likely not random.
Full size image
We show the fraction of women among all new authors in the bottom panel of Fig.
2.
We again see no improvement for the past 10 years and possibly longer.
This indicates strong barriers for women to enter the field of astronomy, likely due to barriers faced earlier during their education.
Individual productivity
We next study the impact of COVID-19 on the productivity of active researchers on an individual basis.
We define ‘active’ as anyone who published in a given year.
We quantify the level of productivity by counting the number of papers each researcher authored, both weighted by their ranking and unweighted.
Paper counting does not take into account the quality or impact level of the paper, as most papers published during COVID have yet to be widely cited.
We estimate the workload each author has performed to contribute to a publication using
$${N}_{{{{\rm{paper}}}}}^{{{{\rm{weighted}}}}}=\mathop{\sum}\limits_{i}{\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)}^{({N}_{{{{\rm{p}}}}}^{i}-1)},$$ (1)
where \({N}_{{{{\rm{p}}}}}^{i}\) is the author’s position in the author order and i loops over all papers an author has written in a given year.
In other words, we assume none-first authors spend roughly half of the effort of the previous author.
In addition, we measure unweighted publication counts \({N}_{{{{\rm{paper}}}}}^{{{{\rm{unweighted}}}}}\) for each active researcher.
In this scheme, we count all papers equally, excluding papers with more than 16 authors.
Combined with the weighted counts from above, unweighted counts provide additional information about collaborative level.
An \({N}_{{{{\rm{paper}}}}}^{{{{\rm{unweighted}}}}}\) that is larger than an \({N}_{{{{\rm{paper}}}}}^{{{{\rm{weighted}}}}}\) shows that an author played a supporting role in multiple collaborative works—likely the case of senior researchers working with many junior students and postdocs.
We show in Fig. 3 both weighted (top) and unweighted (middle) counts for female (blue) and male (orange) authors.
We also show refereed papers only in lighter colours.
For all papers (solid lines), we see an overall increase in both weighted and unweighted counts during COVID, though an initial drop is visible at the onset of COVID-19 in 2020, except for male authors’ \({N}_{{{{\rm{paper}}}}}^{{{{\rm{weighted}}}}}\).
When considering refereed papers only, the increase during COVID is much more minor and nearly invisible in the figure.
We conclude that active (female or male) authors’ productivity and scientific collaboration have not been reduced by COVID-19.
An improvement may even be present, though longer-term data will be necessary to confirm this.
Fig.
3: Average number of papers per author by year.
We show the average number of papers active authors in our sample write each year, for both female (blue) and male (orange) authors.
Active authors are defined as anyone who published in a given year.
In the top panel the average is weighted by the position in the author list; in the middle panel each paper contributes equally to the average.
In the bottom panel we show the ratios between the number of papers published by female and male authors (NF and NM, respectively).
Lighter-coloured curves consider refereed papers only.
Full size image
In the bottom panel of Fig. 3, we show the gender gap in productivity.
Female authors are producing ~10% fewer papers than male authors, at all times (black solid lines).
This persisting trend hints at social and systemic discrimination impacting the scientific productivity of women1.
In our by country analysis, we will show that female researchers in some countries consistently published more than or at similar rates as male researchers pre-COVID, demonstrating that female researchers are indeed as productive as men when provided with adequate support.
Furthermore, the gender disparity is worse when taking collaborative work into consideration (dashed lines).
This trend could be due to the fact that female authors are at earlier career stages on average and still need to establish their scientific network, but it could also point towards barriers to networking and joining collaborative research.
The trend remains in the refereed-papers-only analysis (lighter colours), though with a slightly milder gender disparity.
Female astronomers’ productivity (weighted paper counts) dropped from 92% pre-COVID to 89% during COVID, compared to that of male astronomers.
The drop for unweighted paper counts is smaller, from 89% pre-COVID to 88% during COVID.
The drop is less obvious for refereed papers, possibly due to a delayed referee process during COVID.
Increase in productivity by career stage and gender
We further study the interesting phenomenon of increase in productivity during COVID, by separating authors by their career stage.
We compare the average productivity of researchers during COVID (defined as the time interval from 1 February 2020 to 31 January 2022) to the average productivity during similar time windows before COVID.
We consider a total of 5 × 2-year time intervals from 2010 to 2019, which we treat as control experiments.
From the pre-pandemic time intervals we measure the average productivity of active male and female researchers at different career stages.
We define ‘active’ as having published either during or in the last 2 years before the time interval under consideration.
Here we summarize the result by means of excess productivity, EP, where EP is defined as the difference between productivity during COVID and average productivity in similar time intervals pre-COVID,
$${\mathrm{EP}}={\overline{N}}_{{{{\rm{paper}}}}}^{{{{\rm{COVID}}}}}- < {\overline{N}}_{{{{\rm{paper}}}}}^{{{{\rm{pre-COVID}}}}} >,$$ (2)
where \(< ... >\) averages over the five pre-COVID time intervals.
Standard errors are computed by jackknifing on the pre-COVID data.
We report the EP divided by the estimated standard error σ EP for different career stages and genders.
We further compute the ratio of the excess productivity between male and female researchers.
Results are listed in Table 1 for both first-author publications and all publications.
Table 1 Excess productivity during COVID: we measure the excess productivity, EP, in terms of first-author publications (columns 2–4) and all publications (columns 5–7) during COVID as compared to the average productivity in the years 2010–2019.
We report results separated by gender and career stage.
Standard errors are computed by jackknifing on the pre-COVID data Full size table
We find a general increase in productivity.
However, this increase is not equally shared among different genders and career stages.
Earlier career stages seem to have seen the greatest increase in productivity, but also exhibit greater (more significant) disparities between men and women.
We use both refereed and non-refereed publications in this analysis, since we expect a several-month delay between production and completion of the referee process.
The observed trend is the same for refereed articles, but less significant.
By country
Finally, we study the same statistics for authors in different countries.
In response to the pandemic, governments in different countries implemented drastically different policies.
Analysis by country could reflect the impact of different COVID responses on the scientific community.
We use the country of the most recent affiliation for each author.
There are, in total, 141 countries in our database.
We only include countries with more than 1,000 identified authors, to ensure that Poisson noise is at most at the 10% level, resulting in a total of 25 countries.
The selected countries cover a wide range in geography, culture, economic development, social welfare, scientific priority and COVID-19 policies.
We compute the same statistics as above (for the entire world) pre-
and during COVID for each country.
For pre-COVID statistics, we use the average of 5-year data immediately before COVID (2015–2019).
For COVID statistics, we use the average of 2-year data during COVID (2020 and 2021).
Figure 4 shows the four statistics—overall output, number of new authors, individual productivity weighted by author position and individual productivity irrespective of author position—in ratios of post- to pre-COVID.
Each statistic is shown in pairs of white and grey columns, for the general population and the corresponding gender disparity measurement, respectively.
We rank-order the countries by the first column (overall output) and show the world’s statistics in the first row (shaded in yellow) to guide visual comparison.
Grey points are for pre-COVID measurements, while purple (green) triangles show during-COVID values that are worse (better) than pre-COVID.
We also show the fraction of female researchers who are active between 2015 and 2022 in each country in Supplementary Table 1.
Fig. 4: Impact of COVID-19 on astronomy by country.
We measure the impact in terms of four statistics (white columns), each paired with a corresponding gender-disparity measurement (the adjacent grey column to the right).
Grey points are pre-COVID and purple left-pointing (green right-pointing) triangles are during-COVID values that are worse (better) than pre-COVID.
The world statistics are shown in the first row.
Columns 1 and 2 (overall output): ratio of the number of papers per year during COVID to pre-COVID, and corresponding fraction of female authors.
Columns 3 and 4 (new researchers): ratio of the number of new authors per year during COVID to pre-COVID, and corresponding fraction of new female authors.
Columns 5 and 6 (individual productivity): weighted average number of papers per active author \({\overline{N}}_{{{{\rm{paper}}}}}^{{{{\rm{weighted}}}}}\), where none-first author papers are downweighted, and the corresponding ratio of female to male authors.
Columns 7 and 8 (individual productivity irrespective of author position): unweighted average number of papers per active author \({\overline{N}}_{{{{\rm{paper}}}}}^{{{{\rm{unweighted}}}}}\), where the author order is ignored, and the corresponding ratio of female to male authors.
We only consider countries with more than 1,000 authors (25 in total).
The error bars are not shown for legibility.
For guidance, the Poisson errors are between the 1% level for the countries with the most authors and the 10% level for the ones with fewer authors.
Full size image
In the first column, which shows the ratios of the total number of papers per year post- to pre-COVID, the majority of countries see an increase in scientific output during COVID (except for a few countries, notably Ukraine and Sweden).
To identify the drivers of this increase, we show in column 3 that most countries see a decreasing number of new authors compared to pre-COVID, and hence incoming new authors are not responsible for the increased output worldwide.
Rather, we see improved individual productivity for most countries (columns 5 and 7), driving up the worldwide paper output.
Despite the overall increase in scientific output, more than half of the countries see a worsened situation for women.
Column 2 shows the fraction of papers written by female first authors pre-
and during COVID.
In general, only 20% of papers are written by female first authors.
Column 2 can also be considered a rough indicator of the fraction of female researchers in each country.
During COVID, 14 out of 25 countries saw an even smaller fraction.
The exact reasons for this trend are not deducible from our analysis; we observe declines in the scientific output of female researchers in both better-than-average countries (for example, the Netherlands) and worse-than-average countries (for example, Japan and Israel).
When examining the number of incoming new authors (column 3), we find that the increasing world average is mostly driven by only a handful of countries, namely China, Japan and Taiwan.
Most other countries see a reduced number of new authors, dropping down to as low as 50–70% of the pre-COVID level.
When examining the fractions of women among new authors in each country, we see that they remain roughly at pre-COVID levels (column 4), indicating no additional barriers for women to enter astronomy during COVID.
Finally, when studying individual productivity, we find that most countries see an improvement in individual productivity (column 5) and collaboration (column 7).
However, this improvement is not equally shared by female researchers.
Individual productivity has declined for women (when compared to men) in 17 out of the 25 countries.
More strikingly, no single country’s female researchers were able to be as productive as men during COVID, including the previously 110% outperforming female astronomers in the Netherlands.
A similar situation is seen when taking into consideration collaborative work (column 8), where 13 out of 25 countries experienced a decline for women.
These findings indicate that COVID-19 has taken a higher toll on female researchers.
Idling authors
Here, we turn our focus to the most vulnerable groups who are likely already adversely affected by COVID-19: the previously active authors who became idle during COVID.
We show the probability for an active researcher to become idle in Fig. 5, for both female (blue) and male (orange) authors.
We see that female authors have a much higher chance to turn idle than male authors, at all times.
Fig.
5: Fraction of idle authors per year.
Idle authors are defined as authors who haven’t published in the past 2 years but were previously active authors, defined as producing \({N}_{{{{\rm{paper}}}}}^{{{{\rm{weighted}}}}} > 1\) in the 2 years before becoming idle.
Active female authors (blue) are more likely to become idle than active male authors (orange), at all times.
In the bottom panel we show the world GDP growth17, to illustrate a possible anti-correlation of P idle with socioeconomic changes.
The COVID-19-induced recession is the only one (among six notable recessions) since 1970 without an associated peak in P idle for either gender.
Full size image
We hypothesize that a 2-year idling period means that an author has likely left the field.
To back this claim, we consider the normalized histogram of idle times, defined as the length of the period between two consecutive publications by the same author, in Fig.
6.
Idle times are measured between the first and last publication that we have on record for each author.
The normalized histogram of idle times represents the frequentist probability of observing an idle time.
To put more emphasis on current publication trends and the younger author population, who are more likely to have young children, we made a cut to include only authors who had their first publication in the last 20 years.
We verified that considering different or no cuts changes the results only by a few per cent and does not alter the conclusion.
We find that the probability of an idle time of 2 years (that is, 2 years without writing a paper) is only about 6% (6.4% for women and 5.9% for men).
The probability of having an idle period of 3 years or longer (cumulative) is 7.0% (for both men and women).
This suggests that an average author only has a ~13% chance of ever publishing again if they haven’t published for 2 years.
Therefore, an author who has not published in 2 years has likely left the field with a probability of 87% derived from historical data.
Fig. 6: Normalized histogram of idle times.
Idle time is defined as the time period between two consecutive publications and is measured in authors whose careers started less than 20 years ago (measured by year of first publication).
We verified that considering different or no time cuts changes the results only by a few per cent points.
Full size image
To investigate the potential correlation with the world economy, we show the world Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in the bottom panel17.
We find almost one-to-one correspondences between past recessions (for example, 1975, 1980–1982, 1991–1993, 2001, 2008–2009) and peaks in P idle for female authors.
The trend is similar (though milder) for male authors.
The recent (2008–2009) global financial crisis may have two associated peaks (2008 and 2012).
We found significant anti-correlation between the world GDP growth and P idle with Pearson’s r = −0.42
(P = 0.0023) and r = −0.47 (P = 0.0006) for female and male authors, respectively.
Surprisingly, we do not see an increase in author idling during the current COVID-induced recession, in contrast to all previous recessions in the past 50 years.
This could be due to the limited time period we consider, and a future peak might yet be to appear.
However, previous P idle peaks seem closely associated with corresponding crises (the peaks coincide with the GDP minima), and we even observe a mild drop in the idling rate during COVID.
This seems to indicate that the impact of COVID-19 may be different to historical economic crises.
Changes in the cultural and social aspects of astronomical research—for example, reduced commutes and business trips and increased flexibility in work modes—may have allowed otherwise busy researchers to focus on research and become more productive during COVID.
This may also be partly due to the temporary extension of contracts implemented by institutes during COVID.
Discussion
COVID-induced school and work closures, hiring freezes, loss of childcare, increased eldercare duties and related mental health issues, among others, have had undeniably negative impacts on researchers in all fields.
However, changes such as increased flexibility in work arrangements, reduced commutes and business trips, as well as improved virtual technologies, among others, have been potentially favourable for conducting scientific research.
In studying the impact of COVID on the astronomical community, we found:
The overall output of the field, measured in terms of the number of publications, has increased during COVID, for the whole world (by 13%), as well as for most countries (21 out of 25).
Most countries (22 out of 25) have seen a decreasing number of incoming new researchers, except Japan, Taiwan and China, indicating larger barriers during COVID for new researchers to enter the field or for junior researchers to complete their first project.
Most countries have seen boosted individual productivity, both in terms of increased contribution to scientific papers and contribution to more papers (19 and 23, respectively, out of 25 countries).
While the world has seen an improvement in researchers’ productivity, the gender disparity has widened: a smaller fraction of papers were written by women, and women made up a smaller fraction of incoming new researchers in more than half of the countries we studied.
Even though women were also more productive during COVID, the level of improvement is smaller than for men.
For example, pre-COVID, female astronomers in the Netherlands, Australia and Switzerland were equally as or more productive than their male colleagues.
During COVID, no single country’s female astronomers were able to be more productive than their male colleagues on average.
Our study has several caveats.
First, the underlying causation of the trends seen in our study can be complex and should be carefully discussed and studied in the future.
Second, our gender-based analysis relied on tools designed for binary genders and hence overlooked the non-binary people in the community18, who might have been affected more by the COVID-19 pandemic.
We note that other types of inequalities, such as those related to race, may also have been amplified during COVID, though this is beyond the scope of this work.
Finally, we only have data from a limited period of time after the onset of the pandemic, but its impact is expected to be long term.
While we are able to study the quantitative outputs of the field during COVID, the quality of these papers is yet to be seen.
It would be valuable to revisit this topic in a few years.
Investigation and Outcomes
ED visits for nonfatal pedal cyclist injuries† were identified from the 2019–2020 National Electronic Injury Surveillance System–All Injury Program (NEISS-AIP).
NEISS-AIP data are collected from a stratified probability sample of hospitals and provide weighted national estimates of ED visits for nonfatal injuries.
The monthly proportions of injury-related ED visits accounted for by pedal cyclist injuries in 2020 and 2019 were compared using pairwise t-tests in SAS-callable SUDAAN (version 11.0.3; RTI International); comparison of the changes in monthly proportions by age group and sex was assessed using logistic regression.
Variance was estimated using Taylor series linearization.
This activity was reviewed by CDC and was conducted consistent with applicable federal law and CDC policy.§
During the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic (March–April 2020), ED visits for nonfatal injuries declined by 31% compared with March–April 2019; the total number of nonfatal injury–related ED visits in 2020 declined by 15% compared with 2019.
Despite the decline in total injury-related ED visits, the number of ED visits for pedal cyclist injuries in 2020 (356,630 visits [95% CI = 265,330–447,931]) was 8% higher than in 2019 (328,903 visits [95% CI = 255,096–402,711]).
During March–August 2020 and in November 2020, monthly proportions of injury-related ED visits accounted for by pedal cyclist injuries were significantly higher than during the same months in 2019 (Table).
The age group with the largest increase during most months was children and adolescents aged <18 years.
For example, pedal cyclist injuries in this age group accounted for 6.0% of injury-related ED visits in April 2020, which was 2.9 times higher than in April 2019 (2.1%).
In April 2020, pedal cyclist injuries among adults aged ≥18 years accounted for 1.5% of injury-related ED visits, which was 1.5 times higher than in April 2019 (1.0%); among adults aged ≥50 years, the proportion of pedal cyclist ED visits in April 2020 (1.7%) was 2.1 times higher than in April 2019 (0.8%).
Increases among children and adolescents aged <18 years were sustained during February–November 2020; among adults aged ≥18 years, increased monthly proportions of pedal cyclist ED visits were observed primarily during March–June 2020.
Although the monthly proportions of injury-related ED visits accounted for by pedal cyclist injuries were consistently higher among males in both 2019 and 2020, increases in the proportions of pedal cyclist ED visits during March–May and July–August 2020 were higher among females than males.
For example, in April 2020, pedal cyclist injuries accounted for 1.7% of injury-related ED visits among females, which was 2.4 times as high as those in April 2019 (0.7%).
The proportion of pedal cyclist ED visits among males in April 2020 (2.5%) was 1.6 times higher than in April 2019 (1.6%).
Increases among females were sustained during March–August 2020; among males, increased monthly proportions of pedal cyclist ED visits were observed during February–June 2020.
To help mitigate the spread of COVID-19, this year the Biden administration has committed to making free COVID-19 test kits available to U.S. households through covidtests.gov.
Amazon Web Services (AWS) is honored to support this initiative by working with the U.S. Postal Service (USPS) to make sure the website for test kit ordering meets nationwide demand.
Covidtests.gov formally launched to the public on January 19, 2022.
When households order test kits through covidtests.gov, they are redirected to a USPS website, usps.com/covidtests, to place their orders.
AWS worked with the USPS to make sure the webpage could scale quickly to allow Americans in the United States, its territories, and worldwide military and diplomatic sites to place test kit orders.
The resiliency and scale offered by AWS enabled the U.S. government to build and launch the website in just three weeks and successfully withstand high-traffic loads.
USPS then packaged and delivered the test kits to U.S. households – including nursing homes, university housing, and other residential facilities.
During the initial launch, each household in the U.S. was eligible to order four free test kits per address.
About 60 million households placed orders for their free test kits in the first two weeks and 69 million in the first phase.
In a second launch on March 7, 2022, each household became eligible to order an additional set of four tests.
To date, USPS has received more than 100 million orders for free test kits.
The launch of the COVID test kit website demonstrates how cloud computing can help government agencies quickly scale up to deliver critical missions and improve customer experiences.
Building and launching this site in just three weeks is a testament to the commitment of the U.S. government to providing innovative solutions to serve its missions quickly and effectively.
AWS is honored to support this initiative.
To order your free test kits, visit usps.com/covidtests.
Read more about AWS for government:
Subscribe to the AWS Public Sector Blog newsletter to get the latest in AWS tools, solutions, and innovations from the public sector delivered to your inbox, or contact us.
Please take a few minutes to share insights regarding your experience with the AWS Public Sector Blog in this survey, and we’ll use feedback from the survey to create more content aligned with the preferences of our readers.
Editor's Note: On Feb. 9, federal officials released more information about what will happen once the public emergency ends, including a timeline for when free tests and vaccines will run out.
Read more here.
For the past three years, most Americans have enjoyed access to free COVID-19 tests, treatments and vaccines regardless of insurance status thanks to unprecedented funding from the federal government.
But that's all about the change as the Biden administration plans to end both the national emergency and the public health emergency May 11.
Experts say access to COVID-19 services will now depend on insurance coverage through Medicaid, Medicare or private companies.
The end of the public health emergency may also jeopardize coverage for millions of Americans.
Those who are uninsured, which is approximately 8% of the U.S. population, have few options for COVID-19 care, said Jodie Guest, professor and vice chair of the department of epidemiology at Emory University’s Rollins School of Public Health.
The Biden administration will be shifting health care costs associated with COVID-19 from the government back to individual Americans, she said.
"Our insurance and health care system is pretty chaotic and very expensive, and we’re going back to that.
"
Based on insurance coverage, here's how the end of public health emergency services may affect you.
COVID-19 tests
Ordering free at-home tests through COVIDtests.gov is likely to go away with the end of the public health emergency, experts say.
Medicaid : Free tests until 2024.
: Free tests until 2024.
Medicare:
No longer will receive at-home tests for free.
No longer will receive at-home tests for free.
Private insurers: Varies by state and insurance company.
Polymerase chain reaction tests – known as the PCR tests – are considered "the gold standard" for detecting the COVID-19 virus, health experts say.
But they may cost up to $100 if not covered, Guest said.
See previously:Labs are charging up to $14,000 for coronavirus tests.
Insurers claim 'price gouging.
'
COVID-19 vaccines
With the emergency declaration ending, there may be new economic barriers to getting vaccinated.
Manufacturers Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna sold their vaccines to the government for about $20 a dose, said Dr. Bruce Y. Lee, professor of health policy management at City University of New York Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy.
But now, both companies said they're considering price hikes between $110 and $130, Lee said.
Medicaid: Free vaccines, no end date determined.
Free vaccines, no end date determined.
Medicare : Undetermined.
: Undetermined.
Private Insurers: Varies by state and insurance company.
While private insurance companies may be inclined to cover vaccines similar to annual influenza shots, Guest said nothing is guaranteed.
Those without insurance coverage may have to pay the entire cost.
What's the future of COVID boosters?FDA panel moves toward simplifying shots.
COVID-19 treatment
There's not many treatment options for COVID-19 after the FDA announced last month monoclonal antibody Evusheld is no longer authorized to prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection in the U.S.
But ending the public health emergency may limit access to the few drugs available, including antiviral Paxlovid from Pfizer, health experts say.
Medicaid : Covered until 2024.
: Covered until 2024.
Medicare: Covered through 2024.
Covered through 2024.
Private Insurers: Varies by state and insurance company.
Lee also worries the lack of emergency funding and a return to the slow approval process may demotivate companies from funding research into more COVID-19 treatments and better vaccines.
LATEST: What to know about Paxlovid, the COVID antiviral that keeps people out of the hospital
Telehealth
Before 2020, most states had rules that limited access to telehealth services depending on where someone lived, Guest said.
But COVID-19 and the public health emergency blew that door wide open.
"The availability of telehealth was no longer geographically restricted.
There was an expansion of access, particularly through Medicare and Medicaid," she said.
"There's some concern that a lot of people will lose access to telehealth" now that the declaration is ending.
Health experts worry this may disproportionately affect Americans living in rural areas and those with limited access to general health care services.
Medicaid : States to decide.
: States to decide.
Medicare : Covered through 2024.
: Covered through 2024.
Private Insurers: Varies by state and insurance company.
Medicaid coverage
Before the pandemic, Medicaid recipients underwent a yearly review to make sure they still qualified, Guest said.
The public health emergency paused that review and prevented states from taking people off Medicaid.
With that review process returning, millions of Americans are at risk for not qualifying and losing Medicaid coverage.
More:As pandemic-era provisions lapse, millions of Americans to lose Medicaid
Hospital funding
When the emergency declaration ends, it may mean hospitals won't get extra funding, health experts say.
"Hospitals received a 20% increase in the funds they wouldn't normally have if they discharged a COVID case alive," Guest said.
"That will go away.
"
Health experts fear the lack of funding will lead to more hospital closures, particularly in rural areas, and will leave health care providers unprepared for future coronavirus waves.
Dig deeper
Follow Adrianna Rodriguez on Twitter: @AdriannaUSAT.
Health and patient safety coverage at USA TODAY is made possible in part by a grant from the Masimo Foundation for Ethics, Innovation and Competition in Healthcare.
The Masimo Foundation does not provide editorial input.
The police were in her driveway.
They wanted her son.
Jayne Demsky’s teenage son was not a criminal.
He never stole, used illegal substances, or physically hurt anyone.
He just didn’t go to school.
It started in the middle of 6th grade when he began staying home from school on days his anxiety was too difficult to manage.
Those days became more frequent, turning into weeks and months, until he stopped going altogether.
Now an officer was at her house, waiting to take her son to school.
“I would describe it as hell,” said the mother from Mahwah, New Jersey, who recalled feeling hopeless and constantly "on the verge of an emotional breakdown.
"
Demsky sought help from educators, doctors and counselors, trying to understand what was stopping her son from going to school for nearly a year.
Finally, a psychiatrist told Demsky about a condition that affects a growing number of students with severe anxiety: school avoidance.
“It was almost like a revelation,” she told USA TODAY.
Copy text Copy this quote's text
The quote has been copied Tweet Facebook Email Email this story Share Share this story Jayne Demsky, founder of the School Avoidance Alliance There’s no book on this, it’s not spoken about.
It’s very scary and parents feel a sense of helplessness.
Quote icon
School avoidant behavior, also called school refusal, is when a school-age child refuses to attend school or has difficulty being in school for the entire day.
Several mental health experts told USA TODAY it has become a crisis that has gotten worse since the COVID-19 pandemic.
"There's no book on this, it's not spoken about," said Demsky, whose son declined to be interviewed by USA TODAY but gave his mother permission to share their story.
"It's very scary and parents feel a sense of helplessness.
"
The two continued to struggle with school avoidance for four years with little guidance.
In 2014, she created a website to offer families the help and support she couldn't find.
The site eventually turned into the School Avoidance Alliance, which spreads awareness and educates learning facilities and families of school avoidant children.
Several students who struggled with school avoidance told USA TODAY they would often experience panic attacks in the car on their way to school.
Kyle Slagle, USA TODAY Network
School avoidance is not a concrete diagnosis and looks different in every child.
Some students consistently miss a couple of days a week, while others may leave during the day or escape to the nurse or counselor’s office.
In some extreme cases, students don't step foot in a school for months or years at a time.
Half a dozen family members and students told USA TODAY that school avoidance has affected not only their mental health, often leading to anxiety and depression, but also their family dynamics, relationships with fellow students, and grades.
It has threatened their prospects of graduation and a thriving future.
School avoidance is a complicated condition that neither parents nor school systems are fully equipped to handle.
Some experts say school systems and national organizations are beginning to come up with strategies to get kids back to school, while others wonder if there's a better answer.
"Our waiting list is like 180 families right now," said Jonathan Dalton, a licensed psychologist who runs the Center for Anxiety and Behavioral Change in Maryland and Virginia, which offers treatment to those affected by anxiety and other related disorders, including school avoidance.
"The mental health infrastructure was never designed for this level of need.
"
‘Anxiety and avoidance are teammates’
In the passenger seat of her mother’s car, Anna saw the school slowly peek above the horizon.
Her heart began racing, her body shaking.
Her breathing grew shallow and fast.
And then, the unmistakable sign of her panic attacks: her hand smacking her leg.
“It’s scary because it’s not voluntary at all.
It’s just kind of happening to you,” said Anna, a Virginia college student who spoke on the condition that she not be fully named because of mental health stigma.
“I’ll sit in the car and tell myself to go in, but my body won’t carry me inside.”
Anna, who was school-avoidant in 10th grade, said her school avoidance began spiraling after she recovered from a medical condition.
Despite getting better, she hadn't been to school in a month, and the mere thought of returning generated anxiety.
Jonathan Dalton is a licensed psychologist who specializes in school avoidance and also conducts in-school seminars teaching educators how to handle emotional-based school avoidance.
Josh Morgan, USA TODAY
For most students, mental health experts say, school avoidance is typically a symptom of a bigger problem: anxiety.
“Anxiety and avoidance are teammates because they work on the same function,” Dalton said.
“Kids feel very uncomfortable when they go to school or think about going to school, so they do what evolution teaches them to do and avoid something that makes them scared.”
Anxiety may be a common thread, but the basis of that fear varies with each student, said R. Meredith Elkins, program co-director of the McLean Anxiety Mastery Program at McLean Hospital in Massachusetts.
Copy text Copy this quote's text
The quote has been copied Tweet Facebook Email Email this story Share Share this story Jonathan Dalton, director of the Center for Anxiety and Behavioral Change in Maryland and Virginia
The mental health infrastructure was never designed for this level of need.
Quote icon
School avoidant behaviors most often occur in the transition between elementary, middle school and high school, she said.
“In younger children, we’re more likely to see school avoidance motivated by separation anxiety,” Elkins said.
“As kids get older and their social environment changes, the way they interact with peers becomes important, and we see social anxiety as a more frequent contributor.”
School avoidance also tends to be a gradual process – starting with missing a day or two, then missing a week until the student becomes school avoidant altogether.
The longer a student is away from school, the harder it is to get them back into school, and it can affect other aspects of their life, like relationships and work opportunities, Dalton said.
“We don’t call it work refusal, we call it unemployment,” he said.
“If (students avoid school) and gain short-term relief, they’ll become a master of avoidance, and that doesn’t play well for the future.”
What is school avoidance?
This student mental health crisis is growing.
School avoidance has been on the rise for years, but experts say more students are struggling to get back to class since the COVID-19 pandemic.
Josh Morgan, USA TODAY
‘This is a crisis,’ and COVID made school avoidance worse
Some research suggests as few as 1% of students are school avoidant, while organizations like the School Avoidance Alliance estimate 5% to 28% of students in the country exhibit school avoidant behaviors at some point in their lives.
“How (school avoidance) is defined is nebulous,” Dalton said.
“Different organizations use different language and criteria to describe it.”
Though it’s unclear how many students are affected, mental health experts agree the problem has gotten significantly worse since the COVID-19 pandemic.
As schools began reintegrating in-person learning, many students didn’t return to the classroom.
In some cases, the pandemic halted the progress of many school avoidant students who were making a slow reentry.
In other cases, experts said, the pandemic accelerated school refusal.
With many parents working remotely, experts say it's easier for school avoidant children to stay home.
Kyle Slagle, USA TODAY Network
“We saw a larger shift in kids who were on the cusp before and then after COVID started refusing completely,” said Krystina Dawson, a school psychologist and mental health supervisor in Fairfield County, Connecticut.
“Once the pandemic hit and we introduced remote learning, kids got comfortable in their homes.”
School refusal cases may have also grown as students report experiencing anxiety at record levels.
A Kaiser Family Foundation analysis found adolescents experiencing anxiety or depression increased by one-third from 2016 to 2020.
The same report also found access to mental health services worsened during the pandemic.
“A lot of school refusers, when March 2020 happened, they were like, ‘Welcome to my world,’” Dalton said.
“This was these kids’ lives.”
Experts say it has been more difficult to get students to return to school as they become accustomed to learning and socializing virtually.
Some parents are more likely to be home throughout the day working remotely, which makes it easier for school avoidant children to stay home.
“The family dynamics have changed,” Dawson said.
“Sometimes now there is one parent staying at home, which can be enticing for a child.”
‘Unless you've been through it, you don’t understand’
Katherine and her son Peter started nearly every morning crying together in the school parking lot.
The tears were hot and flowing.
They always drove to the building with hopes he would make inside.
But eventually the pair headed home, longing the next day would be better.
His school avoidance peaked in 2021 during seventh grade.
Katherine, who who lives just outside Boston, spoke on the condition that she not be fully identified because of the stigma associated with mental health.
Katherine identified her son’s affliction after a Google search led her to the School Avoidance Alliance, where she educated herself and found solidarity in the organization's Facebook group.
But she still found little empathy or understanding among friends, family and peers, she said.
About 31.9% of adolescents have anxiety disorder, according to the National Institute of Mental Health.
Kyle Slagle/USA TODAY Network
Her son would say, "‘I just want to be normal.’
It was heartbreaking,” she told USA TODAY.
“As a parent, it is so isolating.
It is so lonely because unless you’ve been through it, you don’t understand.”
The family struggled for years to find the origin of Peter’s anxiety until he was finally diagnosed with pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome, or PANS, which is a sudden onset of neuropsychiatric symptoms typically linked to an infection, according to Nemours Children’s Health.
With the help of treatment and counseling, Peter is now a freshman in high school and goes to school most days.
Katherine was able to secure an individualized education plan for her son, but others are not so lucky.
Copy text Copy this quote's text
The quote has been copied Tweet Facebook Email Email this story Share Share this story Jayne Demsky
There’s shame, blame, and parents also don’t know how to deal with the schools.
It’s a huge maze.
Quote icon
“There’s shame, blame, and parents also don’t know how to deal with the schools,” Demsky said.
“It’s a huge maze.”
Some educators don't take school avoidance seriously, families told USA TODAY.
Schools sometimes threaten students' graduation or take students to family court.
The students who spoke to USA TODAY said that while they know some educators may view them as truant or misbehaving, they understand they’re missing educational milestones and experiences, and they want to return to school.
But many of the schools’ solutions seem to only fuel their depression and anxiety.
"We had the resources, and it was still incredibly difficult" to treat Peter's school avoidance, Katherine said.
"That's just not OK.
"
‘Avoidance ruins lives’
Educators and psychologists say the goal for every case of school avoidance is to get the child back into class.
It’s important for students to stop using avoidance as a coping strategy before it becomes their primary way of dealing with problems for the rest for their lives, Dalton said.
“I don’t treat anxiety.
I don’t have to treat anxiety because anxiety is temporary and harmless,” Dalton said.
“What I treat is avoidance, and avoidance ruin lives.”
Others also argue returning to in-person class is important for social development.
Mara Nicastroi is the head of Nora School in Silver Spring, Maryland.
She says school avoidant behavior has been on the rise since before the pandemic, but for some students, going back to class post-pandemic has been especially difficult.
Josh Morgan, USA TODAY
“You’re increasing the diversity of exposure to social interactions that is difficult to replicate at home because there are some things that are uncontrolled at school that benefits your social development,” said Na’im Madyun, a school psychologist at Prince George County Public Schools in Maryland.
“You’re more informed about how to navigate those nuances when you develop.”
But there’s no standard guidance how how to get kids back in the classroom, which leaves school officials to come up with their own solutions.
“It really takes a team approach,” said Mara Nicastro, head of Nora School, a small college preparatory school in Silver Spring, Maryland.
“We work in conjunction with the family and the therapist ... and talk about what is it that can help make this transition smooth because the student is ready and knows it’s time to find a space to move forward.”
Copy text Copy this quote's text
The quote has been copied Tweet Facebook Email Email this story Share Share this story Mara Nicastro, head of Nora School, a small college preparatory school in Silver Spring, Maryland It really takes a team approach.
We work in conjunction with the family and the therapist ... and talk about what is it that can help make this transition smooth.
Quote icon
Before making that leap, Dalton said most school avoidant students undergo a combination of cognitive behavioral therapy and exposure therapy to understand what exactly the student is avoiding and gradually build their tolerance to that source of anxiety.
This may look like staying in the car at the school parking lot or walking into the guidance counselor’s office and leaving.
Parents with anxiety have difficulty guiding their children in uncomfortable situations, Dalton said, as they reckon with their own traumas related to school.
But it's important to seek help.
Schools need to work with parents and therapists to make the appropriate accommodations, Nicastro added.
“We recognize that our students are learning how to move through their discomfort, their anxiety, and give them opportunities to use those coping strategies.”
Looking forward: What’s being done to help students?
Experts say not all schools – especially large districts – have the resources to operate like the Nora School, which limits enrollment to 70 students.
Many schools don’t reach the American School Counselor Association recommended counselor-to-student ratio of 1 to 250.
The average ratio across all schools is 1 to 464, according to the association, and nearly 3 million of those students don’t have access to other school support staff, like a school psychologist or social worker.
But experts say things are slowly changing.
For example, the Biden administration announced Monday nearly $100 million will be awarded across 35 states to increase access to school-based mental health services through the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act, which was signed into law June 2022.
Meanwhile, school systems and professional organizations are engaged in a national conversation about school avoidance and related protocols, said Duncan Young, CEO of Effective School Solutions, a mental health services provider for K-12 school districts.
Mara Nicastro, who runs a small college preparatory school in Maryland, said it takes a "team approach" with the family, a specialist and the school to help school-avoidant students return to the classroom.
Kyle Slagle, USA TODAY Network
Some protocols have been implemented and include a social-emotional curriculum, mental health counseling and personalized care for students whose mental health challenges impede their ability to operate in a traditional school setting.
“We’re seeing this transition right now,” Young said.
Instead of viewing school avoidance as a behavioral problem, “school districts are building their mental health literacy and understanding the linkage between school avoidance and mental health.”
Meanwhile, some families question the rigid structure of a traditional school system.
Katie, a mother of three who lives in the St. Louis area in Illinois, said her high-school-age son was school-avoidant, but his mental health has significantly improved after transitioning full time to remote learning.
“He’s much healthier,” Katie said, who is on the school board and spoke on the condition that she not be fully identified.
“He’s participating in schoolwork, he’s socializing, he’s attending family dinners again, his depression is so much better, anxiety is so much better.”
He's also working and visiting colleges with plans to continue his education.
If your child is experiencing school avoidance: Show Close and skip Experts urge families to seek professional help through a doctor, therapist or school counselor if anxiety becomes debilitating enough that it affects daily life, relationships and job, or if someone is having thoughts of hurting themselves or others.
If you or someone you know may be struggling with suicidal thoughts, dial 988 to reach someone with Suicide and Crisis Lifeline.
They're available 24 hours a day and provide services in multiple languages.
Hide
In the real world, most people can choose whom they work for or where they go to college, she noted.
But students don't have that flexibility in a traditional school system.
"Children have not always been educated in this one little box," Katie said.
"Whatever that looks like for (my son), I have all the faith in the world that he will be successful one day.
I don’t question it for a second anymore.
"
Despite avoiding school for four years, Demsky's son graduated, secured a job and manages his anxiety independently, she said.
She hopes her story comforts other parents and shows that children can have productive lives after school avoidance.
"I had that fear that my son was going to live in my basement for the rest of his life.
...
That is the fear of every parent," Demsky said.
Now, her son is "thriving.
"
"I'm really proud of him.
"
Follow Adrianna Rodriguez on Twitter: @AdriannaUSAT.
Health and patient safety coverage at USA TODAY is made possible in part by a grant from the Masimo Foundation for Ethics, Innovation and Competition in Healthcare.
The Masimo Foundation does not provide editorial input.
You may have seen recent media coverage about nine children in Nebraska who fell ill with hepatitis.
There has been a fair amount of speculation revolving around the cause of the pediatric hepatitis cases and the possibility of links to COVID-19 or the COVID-19 vaccination.
There are conflicting theories about what may cause otherwise healthy children to become severely sick with acute liver inflammation.
"To be honest, we don't have a perfect sense of the rate or causes of this type of disease in kids at baseline.
However, It does seem clear that we are seeing an unusual spike in pediatric cases of hepatitis of unknown cause in the last nine months across Europe and North America," says James Lawler, MD, MPH, Nebraska Medicine infectious diseases doctor and co-executive director of the Global Center for Health Security.
Public health investigations are pursuing a number of theories, but we don't yet know what is causing a rise in cases.
We need more research before we can draw definitive conclusions.
"What is clear, however, is that COVID-19 vaccines are not causing these cases," says Dr. Lawler.
Most cases are in children under 5, who have not been vaccinated against COVID-19.
"
Among theories that are being investigated:
Adenovirus infection.
Adenoviruses are common childhood infections that generally cause cold-like symptoms.
A number of children who have been affected had evidence of adenovirus infection.
COVID-19 infection or post-infectious event.
This could be related to active COVID-19 infections or recent COVID-19 infections.
We know that recent COVID-19 is what causes the multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) that we have seen during the pandemic.
A potential co-infection or interaction between SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19), adenovirus, or other viruses.
What we do know about hepatitis in kids and COVID-19
"We can't completely rule out that COVID-19 may play a role in this," says Dr. Lawler.
"One plausible theory related to the cause of pediatric hepatitis is prior COVID-19 infection leading to inflammation of the liver, similar to what we see in MIS-C.
We think many post-COVID syndromes (long-COVID) may be due to a dysregulated immune response after a COVID infection.
Studies consistently show that kids get long-COVID and a myriad of problems after recovering from even mild acute infection.
And, we know that most children have had COVID-19 in the last nine months.
"
We know the COVID-19 vaccine is not the cause
We haven't seen a link to COVID-19 vaccination in these cases.
There isn't a documented risk of severe liver disease in adults associated with the COVID-19 vaccines, and there is no reason to suspect this connection in kids.
Also, keep this in mind: Most of these particular hepatitis cases are occurring in children under 5 years old.
"We're not yet vaccinating children under 5," says Dr. Lawler.
"The UK isn't either, and they have the most cases per capita than any country.
In fact, nobody in the world has been vaccinating kids under 5."
What parents need to know about the COVID-19 vaccination
The COVID-19 vaccination for kids is safe.
While every vaccine has potential side effects, the COVID-19 vaccine side-effect profile is well within the bounds of what we consider normal for any vaccine.
With almost 12 billion doses of COVID-19 vaccines given worldwide over the past 20 months, there's as much legitimate data on these vaccines as any other vaccine given in history.
Unfortunately, there has been a lack of education on the risks of COVID-19 on children's health, and why the vaccine is important for them, as well as an incredible amount of misinformation spread online that is simply not based on the facts.
Getting kids vaccinated is the best protection.
"The COVID-19 vaccine is undoubtedly as safe as any vaccines we use routinely," says Dr. Lawler.
"The reality is this: most kids have already had COVID-19 at least once, but there is still a significant risk of reinfection.
Prior infection doesn't give highly protective, long-lasting immunity, particularly against new variants.
Reinfection, however, carries a risk of post-COVID syndromes, hospitalization or death just like a primary infection.
Vaccination guards against this risk and protects family members and the community around children.
"
A vaccine for kids from 6 months to 5 years old will soon be available.
The director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is responding after Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis and the state's surgeon general advised against getting the new booster.
DeSantis advised against anyone under the age of 65 from receiving the shot while Dr. Joseph Ladapo claimed the federal government wasn't being safe about the risks.
CDC Director Dr. Mandy Cohen defended the new COVID-19 boosters as "proven safe" and "effective" and called the comments from DeSantis and Ladapo "dangerous.
"
"Vaccination against COVID-19 remains the safest protection for avoiding hospitalizations, long-term health challenges, and death," Cohen said in a statement.
"As we head into the fall and winter seasons, it is important that Americans get the updated COVID-19 vaccine.
They are proven safe; they are effective, and they have been thoroughly and independently reviewed by the FDA and CDC...Public health experts are in broad agreement about these facts, and efforts to undercut vaccine uptake are unfounded and dangerous.
"
It comes as COVID-19 hospitalizations rise across the country and Florida is seeing higher admissions levels than other states.
As of Monday, 43 of Florida's 67 counties reported moderate levels of weekly new hospital admissions for COVID-19 -- a higher proportion than any other state in the U.S., data from the CDC shows.
Moderate levels indicate between 10 and 19.9 new hospital admissions per 100,000, and the CDC recommends wearing a mask if you are high-risk or self-testing before coming into contact with a high-risk patient.
Weekly COVID-19 New Hospital Admissions in Florida CDC
Statewide, weekly COVID-19 hospitalizations have increased since the beginning of July from 951 the week ending July 1 to 2,406 the week ending Aug. 26, the latest date for which CDC data is available.
Although this is not a record-high in hospitalizations, it is the largest figure seen since the week ending Jan. 28.
"What is happening in Florida is that the number of cases [is] slowly creeping up," Dr. Dushyanth Jayaweera, a professor of medicine and infectious diseases expert with the University of Miami Health System and the Miller School of Medicine, told ABC News.
"It's kind of anticipated.
We were expecting [them] to go up in the winter, but now, this has come up even before that.
"
Jayaweera said there has been an increase in hospitalizations in his area, but many cases are not as severe as in previous years.
Many patients are not admitted for COVID-19 but only find out they have it through testing.
"There are people who are testing positive inside the hospital, but they were not there for COVID," he said.
"They were here for an operation or something else, and they tested positive.
"
He said there are multiple reasons for the increase, including more people gathering indoors and not wearing masks in crowded indoor spaces.
Another reason could be the variants, Jayaweera said.
Currently, EG.5 and FL.1.5.1 -- related to XBB, an offshoot of omicron -- are the two most prevalent subvariants circulating in the country.
Those variants make up about 36% of cases, CDC data shows.
"The latest omicron variants have led to more infections but less virulent viruses," he said.
"So, the important thing is that they are not as virulent as when it was with the delta and previous viruses.
"
Similarly, Dr. Vinay Pallekonda, chief medical officer at HCA Florida West Hospital in Pensacola, told local ABC affiliate WEAR that his hospital has seen an uptick in COVID-19 patients, but few are experiencing serious complications.
"I think we're dealing with this virus in the best way possible," Pallekonda said.
"Right now, we're not quite ringing the alarm bell that we'll fill up our hospitals in the emergency departments with this variant.
"
Dr.'s are seen in this undated stock photo.
STOCK PHOTO/Getty Images
However, experts have said a new booster could help stem a potential wave of COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations in the future.
The Food and Drug Administration approved an updated booster Monday that targets the variants currently circulating for those aged 12 and older and authorized it under emergency use authorization for those between 6 months and 11 years old.
The CDC's advisory committee recommended boosters for all Americans aged 6 months and older on Monday, which was followed by a sign off from Cohen.
Recent data has indicated the shot could offer additional protection against currently circulating variants and even the newer subvariant BA.2.86, which could help stem a potential wave in the future.
Jayaweera recommended people get the booster when they can but warned against assuming it's guaranteed protection against infection.
"Overall, getting the booster will [help] prevent you ending up in hospital even if you get infected," he said.
"The whole idea is you don't want to end up in hospital on a ventilator.
"
ABC News' Justin Gomez and Will McDuffie contributed to this report.
COVID-19 vaccination – Booster doses (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people)
This fact sheet explains why it is important to stay up to date with your COVID-19 vaccinations, and who is eligible to receive a booster dose.
Whether you’ve signed up to bring the mashed potatoes or cranberry sauce to Thanksgiving dinner, rapid tests for COVID-19 should be among your holiday preparations, according to experts at Northeastern University.
Left, Neil Maniar, director of the Master of Public Health program and a professor of the practice in the Bouvé College of Health Sciences.
Right, Brandon Dionne, Assistant Clinical Professor Department of Pharmacy and Health Sciences.
Photos by Matthew Modoono/Northeastern University
“There’s not a hard and fast rule on this,” says Brandon Dionne, associate clinical professor at Northeastern’s School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences.
Instead, he and Neil Maniar, associate chair, professor of practice, and director of the master of public health program at Northeastern, offer some general guidelines on how to time tests to ensure the safety of guests and hosts.
There are some considerations to take into effect when considering a testing schedule, or testing cadence as Maniar terms it.
Will any people attending Thanksgiving dinner be elderly or have health conditions that might predispose them to more severe cases of SARS-CoV-2?
Will you be traveling by air, train or bus, or have you attended recent large gatherings or conferences?
And do you have any symptoms of respiratory illness, such as a runny nose, cough, sore throat or fever?
Test on Thanksgiving morning
People who are asymptomatic and won’t be associating with individuals at higher risk of COVID-19 complications can get away with taking a rapid antigen test Thanksgiving morning, Dionne says.
“The closer to the event the better off you are going to be,” he says.
People who are flying or taking public transportation and arriving Wednesday night should also test Thanksgiving day, Dionne says.
The rapid test will be able to help identify if they had been exposed to COVID-19 before their travels, he says.
Then they should test again in a couple of days to see whether they picked up the coronavirus in transit—and share the results with those they might have exposed to the virus.
When to test days in advance
Individuals who have respiratory symptoms, recently attended large gatherings or conferences or who will be seeing relatives or friends in frail health will want to start testing a few days in advance of the gathering, this Monday night or Tuesday morning, Maniar says.
Depending on when you took the first test, test again Wednesday evening or Thanksgiving morning, he says.
“There’s little downside to testing,” Maniar says.
“With the current variants, the incubation time’s a little shorter,” he says.
It could be two to three days or even shorter.
“I’ve seen instances where individuals are negative on a COVID test on a Monday morning.
And then Tuesday morning, they test positive,” Maniar says.
What if I wake up with a sore throat on Thanksgiving?
If you can’t stay home, wear a mask and test before attending any events or gatherings, Maniar says.
Take a rapid test as close to the time of the gathering as possible, and then again the next morning, he says.
“The length of time between a possible exposure and testing makes a difference in terms of when the viral load reaches a point where it’s actually going to be detected on a test.
It’s possible for a test taken in the morning to be negative and one taken eight or 10 hours later to be positive,” he says.
If you develop a sore throat, fever or runny nose after a Thanksgiving gathering, “I think it’s a good idea to test again for at least a day or two to make sure that that sore throat is not COVID.”
When to a take a PCR test
The PCR test is still the most reliable method of picking up on COVID-19 infections, but big state-operated testing centers have shut down and it will take a day or two to get results back from pharmacies that offer the tests, Maniar and Dionne say.
They say the PCR test is still recommended for people going to visit relatives and friends who are at high risk of COVID-19 complications.
But remember to take the 15-minute rapid antigen test the morning of the get-together as well.
“Just because you have a negative PCR does not necessarily mean that you are 100% negative when you get together with your friends and family” a day or two after testing, Maniar says.
Follow test instructions carefully
Follow antigen testing instructions carefully, Dionne says.
Different testing companies have slightly different instructions, and it’s important to follow them to the letter, he says.
And although it’s not necessary to jam a nasal swab so far up the nose it results in “brain freeze,” there probably should be a little discomfort, Dionne says, adding the swab should circle slowly.
Mask before gathering
Few places require people to wear masks now, and the issue of masking has become one of those political footballs that threaten to wreak conversational havoc at Thanksgiving dinner.
Even so, Maniar and Dionne recommend that people who are taking public transportation, flying or attending large gatherings start masking up days in advance of seeing family and friends at Thanksgiving, particularly if those family and friends are at risk of more severe illness from COVID-19.
“It’s a good idea to take those precautionary measures between now and Thanksgiving, between now and the holidays,” Maniar says.
“Masks are still a really important part of our toolkit to keep ourselves safe.
It’s a good idea because it will significantly reduce the risk of being infected while you’re in transit,” he says.
Dionne says masking in advance of a family or friends gathering can also reduce the risk of transmitting the other illnesses going around, including flu, RSV and the common cold.
Crack a window in the house
The flu and RSV associated with a “tripledemic” of the illnesses and COVID-19 are having a particularly large effect on children and older adults and the hospitals that care for them.
Even if multiple tests show your respiratory infection is unlikely to be COVID-19, Maniar and Dionne suggest staying home or at least wearing a mask to the holiday gathering.
Do what you can to improve airflow, such as by cracking open a window, Dionne says.
Maniar says he hopes everyone gets their COVID-19 bivalent booster and flu shot before Thanksgiving, but if they haven’t to get them now.
College friendsgiving?
Take a test
Testing the morning of a Thanksgiving gathering to prevent the spread of COVID-19 is a good idea even if the participants are young and healthy adults taking part in a college “friendsgiving,” Maniar says.
“There’s growing evidence that repeated COVID infections can actually increase the risk of getting long COVID,” Maniar says.
“It can lead to more complications.
So you really want to continue to minimize your risk for getting it,” he says.
“A couple of years ago, we didn’t have as many tools in our toolkit to keep ourselves safe,” Maniar says.
“Now we do.
This just requires individuals to take advantage of what we have available to us, including vaccinations, boosters, masks and testing.”
For media inquiries, please contact media@northeastern.edu.
Long COVID scientists try to unravel blood clot mystery
Enlarge this image toggle caption Anil Oza/NPR Anil Oza/NPR
Listen to Short Wave on Spotify, Apple Podcasts and Google Podcasts.
The federal COVID-19 public health emergency ended last week, but millions in the U.S. — and across the globe — are still dealing with the repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic in the form of long COVID.
Estimates show that more than 65 million worldwide have the condition, which encompasses a wide range of symptoms that are worsened or appear after initial SARS-CoV-2 infection.
But three years after the first people with persistent symptoms were documented, there is no biomarker for the disease — no test or swab that can diagnose someone with long COVID.
A group of researchers is looking to change that.
From lungs to blood
Early in the pandemic, most thought of COVID-19 as a respiratory disease.
Resia Pretorius, a professor of physiological sciences at Stellenbosch University in South Africa was seeing something else.
After spending years studying blood clotting patterns in other diseases, like diabetes, lupus and arthritis, she was seeing hints of similar, blood-related symptoms in COVID patients.
"It was quite clear from sample one that we are looking at severe clotting pathology," she says.
Currently, Pretorius and her collaborators are seeing what the blood of long COVID patients can tell them about the disease but it started as they tried to understand what COVID was doing to the blood during an acute infection.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Mount Sinai Health System Mount Sinai Health System
"The spike protein has the capability to change your soluble clotting protein to insoluble little microclots and that's where everything starts," Pretorius says.
"So when you have acute COVID you will have activated platelets, you will have vascular damage in endothelial damage and you will have a microclot presence in some individuals.
"
In some people, after around two weeks, the body will begin to break down those insoluble microclots and they will return to normal.
But for others, those microclots hang around and they can damage blood vessels as well as block blood flow to many organs — which could help explain long COVID's wide-ranging symptoms.
"You get widespread and systemic-induced ... inflammation of your blood vessels—the inside of your blood vessels.
If it's systemic, it means it's in every organ.
It's in every part of your body," Pretorius says.
"It means that oxygen transfer cannot happen as it should, between your blood and your organ systems because the vehicle, the blood, is damaged these clots [are] in there.
But more importantly, your vasculature is compromised.
"
A possible biomarker
Without a consistent way to test for and identify people with long COVID, it's more difficult for researchers to study the disease and often harder for patients to get the care they need.
Pretorius says that many long COVID patients see doctors who don't believe the full extent of their symptoms, even if they test patients' blood.
Which means that when patients "go to clinicians, they do the standard pathology workup, blood workup and they say 'Sorry, you don't have anything, there's nothing wrong with you because all your blood tests are normal,'" she says.
"The reason for that is they're not looking at the right place.
"
The goal of Pretorius and her collaborators is to help design a better test that physicians can use to identify those with high levels of microclots.
One of those collaborators is David Putrino, the director of rehabilitation innovation for Mount Sinai Health System.
He hopes that the test they are developing can go further for patients with other post viral illnesses too.
"Often we are told, well, 'Everything's testing normal.
We tested all the standard panels, everything's come back normal.'
I think one of the things that we need to say over and over again is that, you know, the blood panels, the standard blood panels that we test for, they really only capture a very narrow scope of our physiology," he says.
The work he and Pretorius are doing shows that the microclots they are seeing, in addition to hyperactivated platelets, "can really mess with your body's ability to function."
The next step is to find a way to make a mainstream test for it.
All of the long COVID patients Putrino has tested have had microclots and hyperactivated platelets, which is something he doesn't commonly see in people who have never had COVID or who have fully recovered.
It's this high level of microclots in long COVID patients that Putrino thinks might be the biomarker.
One of the questions that remains is, if they continue to see this pattern on a bigger scale, is targeting and getting rid of these microclots an effective treatment?
Roy Silverstein, a hematologist at the Medical College of Wisconsin who isn't involved with this work, says he has two main questions going forward:
"If [microclots] present in the blood in patients with long COVID and not in the blood of patients without long COVID, could they therefore be used as a marker for various treatments to see if, first of all, to define the level of plausibility that the patient has long COVID?
And then to use as a marker in treatment studies?
"
There are other diseases that are marked by changes to the blood's clotting patterns in the capillaries, namely Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura and Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome.
The clots caused by long COVID are made of unique proteins.
"They're not the typical micro clots that we see with those other disease ...
they're made up almost fully of abnormal type of fibrin, which is the protein and blood that forms the blood clot and creates these unusual structures that are called amyloid," he says.
A unique source of funding
Pretorius and her lab have been working around the clock with the hope of helping long COVID patients sooner rather than later.
The first group of people who have long COVID are now reaching the three year mark with the disease.
"That's a really, really long time to be suffering with this illness, which, in many cases has a quality of life that is just so, so low, like unfathomably low to most people — definitely unfathomably low to me, you know, not having known about post-viral illness beforehand," says Hannah Davis, a co-founder and lead researcher of the Patient Led Research Collaborative, who has had long COVID since March 2020.
Because of that urgency, Pretorius took an unusual step — crowdfunding donations to buy a flow cytometer, which uses lasers to analyze individual cells.
Initially, she was using standard fluorescent microscopes, which are common in research labs but not hospitals.
In order to iron out a methodology that could work for clinical settings, she started using the much more common flow cytometer.
She says the speed with which she got sufficient money points to the need for this research in a moment where traditional grants may be too slow.
"If it wasn't for the desperate nature of the disease, I think we would not have been able to crowdfund in such a short time.
"
While Pretorius and her colleagues are making progress, Davis says that it shouldn't have come to this.
"I get to be part of this, this test development process that all of our patient advocacy and patient relationships and things like that have led to — this moment and ... kind of a very concrete impact on our life," she says.
"It shouldn't have to be like this, right?
Like, it should be the case that millions of dollars are designated for finding a biomarker or identifying and creating a test or both.
"
Listen to Short Wave on Spotify, Apple Podcasts and Google Podcasts.
Questions?
Thread of scientific research you're loving?
Email us at shortwave@npr.org — we'd love to hear about it!
This episode was produced by Margaret Cirino and Berly McCoy, edited by Gabriel Spitzer and managing producer Rebecca Ramirez.
It was fact-checked by Emily Kwong, Rebecca and Berly.
The audio engineer was Robert Rodriguez.
The COVID-19 pandemic has led companies around the world to reassess their real estate—how much of it to have, how to use it, and how much to spend on it.
Fortune 50 companies alone occupy 2.6 billion square feet of real estate, and some of it sat mostly empty for long stretches during the pandemic.
At times in the prolonged work-from-home experiment, the media, employees, and even company leaders wondered whether large numbers of offices were necessary at all.
We maintain that strategically located workplaces that are built for purpose and integrated into corporate strategies, cultures, and operating models are more important than ever.
We also strongly believe that companies should cease viewing real estate as a mere cost center and instead approach and configure it as a source of competitive advantage.
Strategically located workplaces that are built for purpose and integrated into corporate strategies, cultures, and operating models are more important than ever.
The right approach to real estate can help companies not only to grapple with the universal challenges arising in the pandemic’s wake but also to achieve their corporate goals.
Marrying strategy to real estate requires a deep analysis of a company’s needs, as well as data to inform decisions.
These decisions are best managed by top strategic thinkers guided by the CEO—a departure from the way companies have traditionally made real-estate choices.
We examined three companies that aligned their approaches to real estate with their corporate strategies and addressed common themes ensuing from the pandemic.
These organizations are now positioning themselves for success by using their physical footprint as a competitive edge.
We also identified three steps companies can take to transition their real estate from a cost center to a source of support for their larger goals.
Companies that act now to rethink their approaches will position themselves most successfully for the future.
Section 1 Using real estate to create competitive advantage
The following examples showcase companies that leveraged real estate to compete more effectively.
Each company thought deeply about some common questions: the purpose of the workplace in the hybrid era, as well as the right balance between freedom and flexibility, on the one hand, and connection and collaboration on the other.
They aspired to create workplaces and policies that would help attract and retain talent—for example, more sustainable commutes, amenities to support the well-being and engagement of employees, and designs that would encourage group work and contentment.
Each company started from a different point of departure: one picked a new location to build a central office from scratch, another repurposed existing offices it leased before the pandemic, and a third redesigned an existing headquarters and upgraded the technology linking it to satellite locations.
This variety demonstrates the range of options for reinvention, even in cases where long-term leases may appear to be a constraint.
A European digital firm: Designing a studio to compete for talent and client work
IncepTech, a Budapest-based digital firm founded in 2014, specializes in building digital products for clients.
It had a clear strategy: in a tight labor market for software engineers, the firm wanted to attract the kind of talent that could easily get jobs at the world’s top technology firms.
IncepTech designed a software-engineering studio to help it attract top tech talent as well as client engagements.
Natural light, foliage, and a location in a hip neighborhood make it a magnetic place to work.
IncepTech interior
IncepTech also wanted a space that would help it move away from competing for client work through traditional written project proposals.
Instead, it hoped clients would come to the office, discuss their needs, and immediately get help solving problems.
In the spring of 2020—just as the pandemic was unfolding—the company began designing a fit-for-purpose software-engineering studio, adorned by plentiful green foliage, with large-pane windows for abundant natural light.
Marrying strategy to real estate requires a deep analysis of a company’s needs, as well as data to inform decisions.
By the end of 2020, IncepTech Studio had been completed.
It was located in a newly hip area of Budapest, on the banks of the Danube, a location that provides beautiful views and walkability to restaurants, services, and other companies.
Minimalist white or light-colored furniture and transparent room partitions create a sense of openness.
The space is designed so that engineers can stare into the distance and think clearly, surrounded by light and greenery.
Meeting rooms are suitable for hybrid work, with smart cameras, digital whiteboards, and glass walls for better visibility.
The studio was intended to show employees that offices can be enriching environments.
A soundproofed music room—stocked with an electric drum set, a keyboard, guitars, microphones, and a computer to produce electronic music—is open to employees for spontaneous jam sessions.
The company hosts get-togethers with staff and external professionals once a month and is planning yoga and meditation events for employees.
IncepTech reports that its offices have been crucial in building its team to roughly 75 full-time employees in a hot market for tech talent.
Although a small firm, it has competed effectively against large global software companies and integrators.
(In February 2022, McKinsey acquired the company.)
Employees are not required to come to the office.
Teams come in when necessary, particularly for intensive brainstorming sessions or last-mile project sprints.
The studio has also helped bring in client work, company executives say: the space provides an attraction point that makes clients want to work from it, and the meeting rooms make it easy to include off-site collaborators.
A technology company: ‘Virtual first’ with a real-estate solution to bolster teamwork
Before the COVID-19-pandemic, roughly 2,700 employees of the technology company Dropbox worked full-time out of one of its offices primarily in San Francisco, Seattle, Austin, New York, or Dublin.
When the pandemic began, the company implemented remote work, leaving those spaces empty.
Dropbox became a “virtual first” company during the COVID-19-pandemic and converted its offices into gathering spaces for collaborative work.
This lounge area in its San Francisco location is one of several spaces where employees can hang out.
Dropbox studio
Dropbox quickly realized that many employees were both highly productive and satisfied with remote work, and in the fall of 2020 declared itself a “virtual first” company.
The challenge was to give employees the flexibility they craved while preserving a sense of human connection, sustaining the company’s long-term health and mission, and retaining a learning mindset.
Dropbox’s Dublin Studio was purpose-built for collaborative work, and includes this café, where employees can make free espressos and cappuccinos, chat, and recharge.
Dropbox’s Dublin Studio was purpose-built for collaborative work, and includes this café, where employees can make free espressos and cappuccinos, chat, and recharge.
Dropbox tailored its real-estate solution to these goals.
Instead of abandoning all of its office space, it converted some of its former offices into Dropbox Studios used for collaborative work, team events, and training.
It optimized the existing spaces for collaboration by removing most desks and creating conference rooms with flexible wall systems and movable furniture so that spaces can increase or shrink depending on need.
In some cases, Dropbox cut the amount of square footage it leases.
In Dublin, it moved to a new location built from the ground up for collaborative experiences.
The new space includes a café, where employees can connect and recharge over free espressos and cappuccinos, and immersive technology for videoconferencing, intended to level the playing field between on-site and remote participants.
Dropbox Studios opened its doors to employees in mid-March 2022, so the concept is largely untested.
The company is committed to adjusting the game plan, depending on how its needs as a virtual-first firm evolve.
“Human connection is a foundational part of our strategy, and studios play an important role in facilitating that,” said Terry Wiener, head of virtual first for engineering, product, and design at Dropbox.
“We’re excited about what we’ll learn in the months and years ahead.”
A biotechnology giant: Real estate that enables fast breakthroughs and ongoing innovation
Gilead Sciences, a global leader in biopharma, began to think deeply about a modernized real-estate plan before the COVID-19 pandemic.
Its Foster City, California, headquarters—the central node of its master plan—had seen the company through decades of pioneering science.
However, many competitors were moving to a different model: the discovery, research, development, and manufacturing of a single drug routinely happen in different parts of the world.
Against a growing drumbeat of remote work, Gilead needed a real-estate strategy to increase connection and collaboration, speed up the transfer of technology, and attract the best scientists.
But how best to position one of the world’s largest research-anchored HQ campuses?
Gilead invested in a headquarters redesign, which included this state-of-the-art, 65,000-squarefoot well-being center with a gym, meditation areas, and mental- and physical-health resources.
Gilead Wellness Center balcony
After a series of analytical workshops, Gilead decided to buck the trend and double down on its HQ.
Instead of selling or leasing off parts of it, the company invested in a redesign.
The campus vision called for the labs and buildings to “follow the molecule,” so the discovery, research, development, scaling up, and manufacturing teams work in spaces that flow from one to the next.
To promote a sense of organic connection, Gilead created inspirational spaces, including a state-of-the-art, 65,000-square-foot well-being center with a gym, meditation areas, and mental- and physical-health resources.
The company also added a cutting-edge laboratory and research infrastructure and accelerated its digital-engineering transformation by adding process data systems that let labs connect with one another seamlessly.
Every HQ space is being digitally enabled so that employees can instantly videoconference with collaborators elsewhere.
Immersion rooms have multiple high-definition screens and one-touch teleconferencing technology, so users feel as though their colleagues were in the same physical environment.
Labs at headquarters and around the world are adding remote systems to help scientists monitor experiments from anywhere, as well as augmented-reality glasses and screens so that remotely located participants feel as if they were standing in the lab.
Gilead’s labs at headquarters and around the world are adding remote systems to help scientists monitor experiments from anywhere, as well as augmented-reality glasses (shown) and screens so that remotely located participants feel as if they were standing in the lab.
Focusing Gilead’s real-estate strategy on scientific efficiency rather than operational economics served the company well during the pandemic.
When COVID-19 hit, Joydeep Ganguly, senior vice president of corporate operations, and his team engineered and delivered a Biosafety Level 3 (BSL-3) laboratory on the main campus in only four weeks, so Gilead’s scientists could work with the virus safely.
Amid unprecedented urgency to create drugs, the innovative campus and laboratory systems played an important role in attracting crucial talent to the company.
“Too many operations strategies focus solely on near-term cost imperatives,” said Ganguly.
“While this is important, there is far greater value to having the operations-footprint vision serve a greater role by catalyzing innovation, engaging and attracting talent, and enabling corporate ambitions.”
The company will continue to invest in its headquarters, to evolve the “flash lab” design, and to invest in next-level collaboration technology.
“At Gilead, we continue to believe our master plan will catalyze the collective brilliance of our colleagues and serve as a magnet for top scientific minds,” Ganguly said.
Section 2 From cost center to competitive advantage: Three steps
The first step in developing real estate as a competitive advantage is for leaders to determine the corporate metrics and objectives they want to achieve.
Next, they must identify the moments that matter for employees, suppliers, and customers to achieve those metrics and objectives.
Real estate should be a multidisciplinary issue linked directly to corporate strategy, so the third step is to set up a steering committee to assess the current real-estate footprint and ensure that it aligns with corporate objectives and the moments that matter.
Determine corporate objectives and metrics
The riddle that companies must solve is which moments of togetherness with other employees, suppliers, or customers actually improve outcomes.
Before the pandemic, the most common objective of real-estate policy was simply to reduce absolute costs or costs per employee.
After COVID-19, if the goal of a company remains to reduce the cost of its real estate, it can simply have its staff work from home, where many employees are quite happy.
However, for some companies, a fully remote workforce may not always yield the best productivity, connectivity, diversity and inclusion, innovation, loyalty, or apprenticeship results.
Real estate can address many objectives.
They include accelerating innovation, upskilling the workforce, advancing digital and technological transformations, stimulating collaboration, creating an optimal hybrid model, diversifying talent, and getting closer to customers.
An organization’s real estate should result from its strategy and operating model.
To set a baseline, organizations can start by identifying and measuring the most important metrics across different types of real estate.
To determine how much office space a company needs, for example, key metrics could include how employees feel about their company, sales per salesperson, throughput, errors and omissions, and greenhouse-gas emissions.
Then companies can experiment with different alternatives, run pilots, and choose optimal solutions based on the metrics.
Identify the moments that matter
In a world where many employees can work remotely, the riddle that companies must solve is which moments of togetherness with other employees, suppliers, or customers actually improve outcomes.
The moments that matter rely on having the right people working on the right things at the right times—and in the right places.
But few organizations know which moments matter most.
They could include onboarding new hires, apprenticeship relationships, brainstorming meetings, challenging conversations, experiences that foster social cohesion, resolving customer complaints, selling to customers, or unplanned collaboration.
The location, size, and design of the workplace should all support the most urgent requirements for togetherness.
Set up a steering committee
Traditionally, real-estate choices have been made by a real-estate team that typically reports to a chief procurement or operations officer.
The most important decisions are escalated to the CFO.
But today’s real-estate team has new responsibilities, namely: making the current footprint consistent with corporate objectives and the moments that matter.
This calls for a different set of decision makers.
The CEO can set the real-estate agenda, supported by the chief human-resources officer (CHRO), the CIO, the CFO, and the head of real estate.
Experts from all these domains can help make real estate a source of competitive advantage.
In the wake of the pandemic, historical precedent or cultural or industry norms should not shape real-estate decisions.
Today, a company’s larger goals must serve as the guide.
CEOs and executive teams know what makes companies successful and are best positioned to create a physical environment to match.
Merging a company’s approach to real estate with its strategy is a change in the way things have been done and a new responsibility.
It’s also a once-in-a-generation opportunity to act boldly and emerge from the pandemic stronger and more competitive than ever.
Images used in this article were provided by Dropbox, Gilead Sciences, and IncepTech.
The image of the Dropbox café in Dublin is courtesy of Donal Murphy and Interior Architects.
Tel Aviv, 13 September 2022
New modelling conducted for WHO/Europe by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) at the University of Washington’s School of Medicine in the United States shows that in the first two years of the pandemic, at least 17 million individuals across the 53 Member States of the WHO European Region may have experienced post COVID-19 condition, also known as long COVID.
In other words, an estimated 17 million people met the WHO criteria of a new case of long COVID with symptom duration of at least three months in 2020 and 2021.
The modelling indicates a staggering 307% increase in new long COVID cases identified between 2020 and 2021, driven by the rapid increase in confirmed COVID-19 cases from late 2020 and throughout 2021.
The modelling also suggests that females are twice as likely as males to experience long COVID.
Furthermore, the risk increases dramatically among severe COVID-19 cases needing hospitalization, with one in three females and one in five males likely to develop long COVID.
“While there is much we still need to learn about long COVID, especially how it presents in vaccinated versus unvaccinated populations and how it impacts reinfections, this data highlights the urgent need for more analysis, more investment, more support, and more solidarity with those who experience this condition,” said Dr Hans Henri P. Kluge, WHO Regional Director for Europe.
“Millions of people in our Region, straddling Europe and central Asia, are suffering debilitating symptoms many months after their initial COVID-19 infection.
They cannot continue to suffer in silence.
Governments and health partners must collaborate to find solutions based on research and evidence.”
“IHME’s research shows that nearly 145 million people around the world in the first two years of the pandemic suffered from any of the three symptom clusters of long COVID: fatigue with bodily pain and mood swings, cognitive problems, and shortness of breath.
Fast-forward to today and millions of people continue to suffer because of COVID-19’s lingering impact on their health and livelihoods,” said Dr Christopher Murray, Director of IHME, one of WHO’s 800 Collaborating Centres.
“Knowing how many people are affected and for how long is important for health systems and government agencies to develop rehabilitative and support services.
It’s also paramount for employers to understand, so that special accommodations can be made to help those facing limitations.”
Post COVID-19 condition, or long COVID, refers collectively to the constellation of long-term symptoms that some people experience after they have had COVID-19.
While most people who develop COVID-19 fully recover, it is estimated that 10–20% develop a variety of mid- and long-term effects like fatigue, breathlessness, and cognitive dysfunction (for example, confusion, forgetfulness, or a lack of mental focus and clarity).
Long COVID can also directly and indirectly affect mental health.
Prolonged suffering and distress due to long COVID can impact psychological well-being.
These symptoms might persist from the initial illness or develop after recovery.
They can come and go or relapse over time.
The condition can affect a person’s ability to perform daily activities such as work or household chores.
To help to address the gaps in our knowledge and advocate for people living with long COVID, WHO/Europe today announced an official partnership with Long COVID Europe, a network organization that comprises 19 patient associations based in Member States across the European Region.
WHO/Europe has had an ongoing collaboration with Long COVID Europe since September last year, with the network participating in both the 71st session of the WHO Regional Committee for Europe in 2021 and this year’s72nd session in Tel Aviv, Israel.
Ann Li, Chair of Long COVID Europe, who has herself experienced long COVID, recounts: “My husband and I got COVID-19 in March 2020.
I don’t have clear memories from that time, which the doctors think was probably due to a lack of oxygen, but all I remember is the pain, not being able to breathe, being very tired and wanting to sleep all the time.
The worst thing for me was the ongoing brain fog. ...
For a while I couldn't even talk properly.
I could only talk very slowly as it was so difficult to form sentences in my head.”
“We are so grateful to be officially collaborating with the World Health Organization,” continued Ms Li.
“By acting on long COVID and partnering with Long COVID Europe, WHO/Europe is showing the leadership needed to find solutions to the crisis – and indeed it is a crisis.”
Long COVID Europe and WHO/Europe have together developed three goals – the 3Rs – jointly calling upon governments and health authorities to focus attention on long COVID and people living with it through greater:
recognition and knowledge sharing, where all services are adequately equipped, and no patient is left alone or having to struggle to navigate a system that is not prepared, or not capable of, recognizing this debilitating condition;
research and reporting through data gathering and reporting of cases, and well-coordinated research, with full participation of patients needed to advance understanding of the prevalence, causes and costs of long COVID; and
rehabilitation that is based on evidence and effectiveness, and is safe for both patients and carers.
“For these goals to be achieved, we need all countries in the WHO European Region to recognize that long COVID is a serious problem with serious consequences and that it requires a serious response to stop the lives of those affected from getting any worse – and not just on a physical health level,” said Dr Kluge.
“We are hearing stories of so many individual tragedies, of people in financial crisis, facing relationship problems, losing their jobs, and falling into depression.
Many health workers who risked their lives on the front lines of the pandemic now have this chronic and debilitating condition as a result of an infection acquired in the workplace.
They, and millions of others, need our support.
The consequences of long COVID are clearly severe and multifaceted.”
“Leaving no one behind is more than just a tagline, and leaving people struggling with the consequences of their COVID-19 infections while others move on with their lives is not an option,” noted Dr Natasha Azzopardi-Muscat, WHO/Europe’s Director of Country Health Policies and Systems.
“WHO/Europe is committed to working with long COVID patient associations, research institutions, public health authorities and governments to improve research and ensure that health services can support patients properly with their rehabilitation needs.”
The masking mandate inside hospitals in Massachusetts was, by and large, lifted in May, and face coverings became optional.
But now, there's been a cluster of COVID-19 cases at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston.
"It's something that could have been completely prevented," said Harvard Medical School instructor Dr. Lara Jirmanus.
"It's a shame and a pity.
"
A hospital spokesperson says the facility detected a cluster of COVID cases among staff and patients, isolated those patients, and reinstated universal masking in the affected unit.
Get Boston local news, weather forecasts, lifestyle and entertainment stories to your inbox.
Sign up for NBC Boston’s newsletters.
As of Monday night, Beth Israel had not said how many people were diagnosed with COVID.
Tuesday, hospital officials said there were under 20 cases.
The Department of Public Health further clarified Wednesday that 12 staff members and seven patients were infected, with no critical illness reported and none being transferred to intensive care.
The hospital still has not said what unit or units were impacted.
Most Massachusetts hospitals lifted their mask requirements when the COVID emergency came to an end.
"Some people said, 'Well, we're not totally sure what's going to happen,'" said Jirmanus.
"Well, I think we all know what was going to happen.
When you take away masks in health care, you have outbreaks.
"
Jirmanus has been one of the leading voices urging health care facilities to keep masking mandatory.
She says Beth Israel needs to be more forthcoming about the situation.
"The information about outbreaks should be public," she said.
"It should be made publicly available.
We track other infections.
We should be tracking hospital-acquired COVID, as well.
"
NBC10 Boston asked Tufts Medical Center, Brigham and Women's, Massachusetts General Hospital, and UMass Memorial Medical Center if they will consider reinstating any mask mandates, but they did not respond to requests for comment.
Editor’s Note (4/18/23): On April 18 the Food and Drug Administration authorized a second bivalent COVID booster for people aged 65 and older who had their first bivalent shot at least four months earlier and for immunocompromised individuals who received it at least two months earlier.
Additional doses can be given to immunocompromised people at their health care provider’s discretion.
Many people in the U.S. who are fully vaccinated and boosted for COVID have been waiting—eagerly in some cases—to receive another layer of protection as they pass the six-month mark after their last booster in fall 2022.
But most will have to continue to wait.
Late last month the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention upheld its existing COVID vaccination recommendations: the agency says that just one dose of the latest updated booster, often called the bivalent booster, is necessary for now.
The Food and Drug Administration has also only authorized the same one-dose booster.
This contrasts with official guidance in other countries.
In early March Canada and the U.K., for example, began offering an additional booster dose to certain populations at high risk of severe COVID, including elderly people, residents of long-term care facilities and immunocompromised individuals.
The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends countries consider an additional booster six or 12 months after the last for older adults, those who have comorbidities or who are immunocompromised or pregnant, and frontline health care workers.
The WHO also says healthy children from six months to 17 years old may not need any additional boosters.
On supporting science journalism
If you're enjoying this article, consider supporting our award-winning journalism by subscribing.
By purchasing a subscription you are helping to ensure the future of impactful stories about the discoveries and ideas shaping our world today.
“The messaging could get very confusing,” says William Schaffner, a preventive medicine and health policy professor at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, who is a consultant to the CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).
“One of the most difficult things I’ve learned during this pandemic is how hard it is for the general public to live with changing recommendations over time.
They would like a definitive answer now.”
This uncertainty has created challenges for both the public and those in the health care field, including members of the ACIP.
What do these recommendations mean for people—especially those at high risk of developing severe COVID—who want the extra layer of protection?
Scientific American spoke to experts to find out what is and isn’t known about the immunity levels conferred by COVID boosters, what it means to get an additional booster outside the recommendations and what the situation might look like by this fall.
How do the current bivalent vaccination rates factor into the new guidance?
The bivalent booster now available in the U.S. came out in September 2022.
It was formulated to cover the COVID-causing virus’s Omicron strains BA.4 and BA.5 and the original strains from 2020.
After an initial wave of people received the booster in the fall and early winter, the rate of vaccinations has dropped.
A number of fully vaccinated and boosted peoplewould likeanother booster for additional protection, Schaffner says, but a much larger population has not yet received any booster at all.
Only 16.7 percent of the U.S. population (about 55 million people) have had the latest one—far fewer than officials had hoped.
“That’s clearly been a source of considerable disappointment to everyone in public health,” Schaffner says.
“The current public health thrust is not to give people an additional booster but to get people to take the first bivalent booster.”
The CDC says it continues to monitor emerging data but maintains its recommendation of one updated COVID vaccine for eligible people aged six months and older.
“Too few people, particularly those who are older and at high risk for severe COVID-19, have taken advantage of getting an updated COVID-19 vaccine.
And we encourage eligible individuals to speak with their health care provider and consider receiving one,” says CDC representative Kristen Nordlund.
Scientists in a vaccine working group within ACIP presented data in February that show vaccination uptake has declined after each official recommendation of an additional dose.
The scientists pointed to several factors, including vaccine and COVID “fatigue” and a perception that initial vaccinations have provided enough immunity.
What do we know about the bivalent booster’s effectiveness and immunity levels?
The latest studies show the bivalent boosters effectively protect against severe disease and death.
The CDC reported in February that mortality rates among people who received a bivalent booster were 14 times lower than in those who had never been vaccinated and three times lower than in people who received the original COVID vaccination series but no booster.
Other early estimates also indicate the bivalent booster increases protection against two of the latest Omicron strains, XBB and XBB.1.5, for at least the first three months after vaccination in people who had previously received at least two of the past monovalent vaccine doses.
Notably, the bivalent shots are especially effective against COVID-associated hospitalization in older adults.
But U.S. residents older than age 65 have been getting this booster at lower-than-expected rates—just 42 percent of that population has gotten it—says Carlos del Rio, a clinician and epidemiologist at Emory University.
“If you’re telling me you’re 40 and you have no underlying conditions, it’s probably not an urgency to get another booster,” del Rio says.
“But if you’re over 65, that’s a problem.”
Less is known about how long immunity lasts after receiving the bivalent vaccinations.
ACIP’s COVID vaccine working group, however, says its information on the original monovalent series and boosters suggests protection against hospitalization starts waning four months after a person receives the dose.
“It doesn’t go to zero,” Schaffner says.
“After a period of months, it might go from 90 percent to 70 percent.
So from a population basis, there still is substantial protection out there.”
On an individual basis, however, waning protection gets more complicated—especially in high-risk groups.
Studies have demonstrated that monovalent COVID vaccine effectiveness in certain immunocompromised people, particularly organ or stem cell transplant recipients, is lower than in others.
“Wouldn’t it be appropriate for [high-risk groups] to receive a spring or summer booster if it’s been five or six months since they have received the initial bivalent booster?
It’s a perfectly reasonable question,” Schaffner says.
Protection appears to be restored after people receive additional doses over time, according to ACIP.
“We are seeing very, very low rates—far less than 5 percent—of severe disease in people who are immunocompromised, well vaccinated and receive standard antiviral treatments,” said committee member Camille Kotton, an infectious disease clinician at Massachusetts General Hospital, during February’s ACIP meeting.
She added, however, “There are still many, many immunocompromised [people] who have not taken the opportunity to get the bivalent vaccine.”
Can you get another booster if you want one?
Some members at the February ACIP meeting urged the FDA and CDC to allow flexibility with vaccine guidance and availability, especially for high-risk populations, as new data come out.
ACIP member Michael Hogue, a pharmacy professor at Loma Linda University, suggested during the meeting that people speak with clinicians about this.
“We want those clinicians to be able to make good decisions for the individual patient based upon their comfort and desire, as long as we have safety in mind.
And it’s clear that we do in fact have a very safe vaccine with our bivalent vaccine,” Hogue said.
“Flexibility just needs to be put into this, in some way, with both older adults and people with immunocompromising conditions.”
Under the latest recommendations, that flexibility doesn’t exist—technically.
Some people have managed to “game the system” and get extra boosters, Schaffner says, noting that “there’s no vaccine police.”
To find a “friendly pharmacist” willing to provide that extra dose, “you may have to shop around a little bit.
Many pharmacies and clinics will not [provide one] because they’re not authorized to do that,” he says.
“That would be operating outside of the emergency use authorization under which the vaccine is currently being made available.”
People who get extra boosters do so at their own risk, and medical treatment for any side effects would not be covered by the government program authorized to provide benefits during the COVID public health emergency.
“If you get a vaccine outside of the current guidelines, you are kind of out there on your own.
And if there was a risk, albeit small, you are assuming it on your own,” Schaffner says.
ACIP’s working group found that the longer the time between the two doses of the primary series, the lower the risk of myocarditis—heart tissue inflammation that has occurred in a small number of people who received COVID vaccines.
But the risk of health problems from any of the COVID vaccines is very low.
Amira Roess, a global health and epidemiology professor at George Mason University, questions how the one-dose booster guidance could impact vaccine access for some people.
“What does that mean from a health equity perspective?
Well, it means that you have to have a health care provider that you go to regularly—and we already know that there are lots of individuals in this country who don’t have access to high-quality health care,” Roess says.
“If you can’t get the booster from [a local pharmacy], and you’re immune compromised, and you’re not seeing your health care provider regularly, you’re not going to have access to an additional booster, even if you knew you needed it.”
Access barriers persist among people experiencing homelessness, those with disabilities and some minority groups.
CDC data show that as of April 5, only 9.2 percent of people who identify as Black and 8.8 percent of people who identify as Hispanic or Latino have received the latest booster.
“I can imagine that this gap in equity would be even larger should a second booster also be mandated,” says Jacinda Abdul-Mutakabbir, a clinical pharmacist and assistant professor at the University of California, San Diego.
She adds that the end of the federal government’s official COVID public health emergency, set for May 11, will likely make equitable access even more difficult.
What does the future of COVID vaccinations look like?
So far all U.S. COVID vaccines and boosters have been government-supported and administered without charge.
But along with subsidized treatment, testing and other services, this may change soon.
“This all gets complicated with the ending of the public health emergency, because that would mean vaccines are now going to cost you money,” del Rio says.
“The government still has significant vaccines out there, but I think that’s going to be an issue going forward.
I don’t know what the insurance plans are going to do.”
Schaffner and others say they have heard the FDA is considering an emergency use authorization for a spring or summer booster in high-risk groups.
Several news reports also suggest such an announcement may be made in the coming weeks.
When asked for comment, the FDA said it continues to monitor emerging data and will base any such decisions on new information.
“We hope that simplifying the COVID-19 vaccine regimen in the not too distant future will lead to the vaccination of more individuals in the coming years as we learn to live alongside SARS-CoV-2—potentially reducing serious outcomes, including hospitalization and death,” wrote an FDA spokesperson in an e-mail to Scientific American.
Schaffner says the current CDC and FDA guidance may signal a step away from rolling out COVID boosters every six months and toward an annual vaccination schedule.
Many experts anticipate the next booster will be timed with the flu shots in the fall and will likely be an updated formula.
“Quite notably, there are still somewhere on the order of 250 to 300 COVID deaths daily in the United States,” Schaffner says.
“So it’s by no means trivial.”
As we pass the three-year mark since the World Health Organization characterized the COVID-19 pandemic on March 11, 2020, data from the U.S. show that cases and deaths have remained relatively low through the second half of 2022, over 8 in 10 people (81%) had received at least one COVID-19 vaccination dose as of February 23, 2023, while only 17% of people ages five and older had received an updated bivalent booster dose.
Over the course of the pandemic, racial disparities in cases and deaths have widened during variant surges and narrowed when cases and deaths fall.
However, overall, Black, Hispanic, and American Indian and Alaska Native (AIAN) people have borne the heaviest health impacts of the pandemic, particularly when adjusting data to account for differences in age by race and ethnicity.
While Black and Hispanic people were less likely than their White counterparts to receive a vaccine during the initial phases of the vaccination rollout, the disparities in the share that have received at least one COVID-19 vaccination dose have narrowed over time and reversed for Hispanic people.
Despite this progress, a vaccination gap persists for Black people and Black and Hispanic people are about half as likely as their White counterparts to have received an updated bivalent booster dose.
This data note presents an update on the status of COVID-19 cases and deaths by race and ethnicity as of December 2022 and vaccinations by race/ethnicity as of February 2023, based on federal data reported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
What is the status of COVID-19 cases and deaths by race/ethnicity?
Racial disparities in COVID-19 cases and deaths have widened and narrowed over the course of the pandemic, but when data are adjusted to account for differences in age by race/ethnicity, they show that AIAN, Black, and Hispanic people have had higher rates of infection and death than White people over most of the course of the pandemic.
Early in the pandemic, there were large racial disparities in COVID-19 cases.
Disparities narrowed when overall infection rates fell.
However, during the surge associated with the Omicron variant in Winter 2022, disparities in cases once again widened with Hispanic (4,404.9 per 100,000), AIAN (4,148.6 per 100,000), Black (3,029.4 per 100,000) people having higher age-adjusted infection rates than Asian (2,873.4 per 100,000) and White people (2,826.4 per 100,000) as of January 2022 (Figure 1).
Following that surge, infection rates fell in Spring 2022 and disparities once again narrowed.
During Summer 2022, there was a slight rise in infection rates with higher age-adjusted infection rates for Hispanic, AIAN, Black, and Asian people compared to White people.
Between Fall/Winter 2022, infection rates fell across groups, but as of December 2022, the age-adjusted COVID-19 infection rates were highest for Hispanic people (488 per 100,000) and AIAN people (440 per 100,000).
White and Asian people had the lowest infection rates at 313 per 100,000 and 329 per 100,000, respectively.
While death rates for most groups of color were substantially higher compared with White people early in the pandemic, since late Summer 2020, there have been some periods when death rates for White people have been higher than or similar to some groups of color.
However, age-adjusted data show that AIAN, Black, and Hispanic people have had higher rates of death compared with White people over most of the pandemic and particularly during surges.
For example, as of January 2022, amid the Omicron surge, age-adjusted death rates were higher for Black (37.6 per 100,000), AIAN (34.8 per 100,000), and Hispanic people (30.0 per 100,000) compared with White people (23.5 per 100,000) (Figure 1).
Following that surge, disparities narrowed when death rates fell.
As of December 2022, age-adjusted death rates were similar across groups at 4.4 per 100,00 for White people, 3.8 per 100,000 for AIAN people, 3.7 per 100,000 for Black people, 3.5 per 100,000 for Hispanic people, and 3.2 per 100,000 for Asian.
Despite these fluctuations in patterns of cases and deaths by race and ethnicity over time, total cumulative age-adjusted data show that AIAN and Hispanic people have had higher risk for COVID-19 infection and AIAN, Hispanic, and Black people have had higher risk for COVID-19 deaths compared with White people.
As of December 28, 2022, cumulative age-adjusted data showed that AIAN and Hispanic people were about 1.5 times as likely to be infected with COVID-19 compared with White people (Figure 2).
AIAN people were twice as likely as White people to die from COVID-19, and death rates for Hispanic and Black people were 1.7.
and 1.6 times higher than White people, respectively.
AIAN, Black, and Hispanic people also have had increased risk of hospitalization due to COVID-19 compared with White people.
What are COVID-19 vaccination and booster patterns by race/ethnicity?
While disparities in the uptake of at least one COVID-19 vaccination dose have narrowed over time and have been reversed for Hispanic people, they persist for Black people.
KFF analysis shows that at both the federal and state level, there were large gaps in vaccination for Black and Hispanic people in the initial phases of the vaccination rollout, which narrowed over time and eventually reversed for Hispanic people.
Despite this progress, a vaccination gap persists for Black people.
According to the CDC, over 8 in 10 people (81%) had received at least one COVID-19 vaccination dose as of February 23, 2023, and race/ethnicity was known for 76% of people who had received at least one dose.
Based on those with known race/ethnicity, about half (51%) of Black people had received at least one dose compared with 57% of White people, roughly two-thirds (67%) of Hispanic people, and over seven in ten Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander (NHOPI) (71%), Asian (73%), and AIAN (78%) people (Figure 3).
Overall, few people have received the updated bivalent booster vaccine dose, and Black and Hispanic people are about half as likely as White people to have received this booster so far.
The updated bivalent boosters protect against both the original virus that causes COVID-19 and the BA.4 and BA.5 Omicron variants.
These boosters became available for people ages 12 years and older on September 2, 2022, and for people ages 5-11 years old on October 12, 2022.
The CDC recommends that people ages 5 years and older receive one bivalent booster at least 2 months after their last COVID-19 vaccine dose.
The CDC reports that, overall, 17% of people over age five have received the updated bivalent booster vaccine dose as of February 23, 2023, with race/ethnicity data available for 90% of recipients.
Based on those with known race/ethnicity, 21% of eligible Asian people had received a bivalent booster dose, higher than the rate for White people (16%).
Rates were slightly lower for eligible AIAN (14%) and NHOPI (11%) people, while eligible Black (9%) and Hispanic 8%) people were about half as likely as their White counterparts to have received the bivalent booster dose (Figure 3).
Discussion
While disparities in cases and deaths have widened and narrowed over the course of the pandemic, age-adjusted data show that AIAN, Black, and Hispanic people have had higher rates of cases and death compared with White people over most of the course of the pandemic and that they have experienced overall higher rates of infection, hospitalization, and death.
Data point to significantly increased risks of COVID-19 illness and death for people who remain unvaccinated or have not received an updated bivalent booster dose.
During the initial vaccine rollout, Black and Hispanic people were less likely to receive vaccines than their White counterparts.
However, disparities in the uptake of at least one COVID-19 vaccination dose have narrowed over time and reversed for Hispanic people, though they persist for Black people.
Despite this progress in initial vaccination uptake, overall uptake of the updated bivalent booster dose has been slow so far, and eligible Black and Hispanic people have been about half as likely to have received an updated booster than their White counterparts.
Overall, these data show that although the pandemic has contributed to growing awareness and focus on addressing racial disparities, they persist, reflecting the underlying structural inequities that drive them.
The findings highlight the importance of a continued focus on equity and efforts to address inequities that leave people of color at increased risk for exposure, illness, and death as well as to close gaps in access to health care, as COVID-19 recovery continues.
On a Saturday in September 2020, with Covid-19 killing more than 600 Americans daily and hundreds of thousands of deaths still to come, Dr. Deborah L. Birx, a member of the White House coronavirus task force, heard her cellphone ring.
It was Dr. Scott Rivkees, the Florida surgeon general.
He was distraught.
“‘You won’t believe what happened,’” she said he told her.
Months before Covid vaccines would become available, Gov. Ron DeSantis had decided that the worst was over for Florida, he said.
Mr. DeSantis had begun listening to doctors who believed the virus’s threat was overstated, and he no longer supported preventive measures like limiting indoor dining.
Mr. DeSantis was going his own way on Covid.
Nearly three years later, the governor now presents his Covid strategy not only as his biggest accomplishment, but as the foundation for his presidential campaign.
Mr. DeSantis argues that “Florida got it right” because he was willing to stand up for the rights of individuals despite pressure from health “bureaucrats.”
On the campaign trail, he says liberal bastions like New York and California needlessly traded away freedoms while Florida preserved jobs, in-person schooling and quality of life.
But a close review by The New York Times of Florida’s pandemic response, including a new analysis of the data on deaths, hospitalizations and vaccination rates in the state, suggests that Mr. DeSantis’s account of his record leaves much out.
The guidance on this page has been clinically reviewed by CHOC pediatric experts.
The contents of this webpage, including text, graphics, audio files, and videos (“Materials”), are for your general information only.
The Materials are not intended to substitute qualified professional or medical advice, diagnoses, or treatments.
CHOC does not recommend or endorse any specific tests, physicians, products, procedures, or other information that may be mentioned on or linked to this webpage.
Always call your physician or another qualified health provider if you have any questions or problems.
If you think you may have a medical emergency, call your doctor, go to the nearest emergency department, or call 911.
For more health information for your family visit health.choc.org
Data
The Emergency Medicine (EM) Resources and COVID-19 Historical Data by County for Wisconsin datasets are used to estimate the cases and hospitalizations
[37].
The datasets include information including name of the geographic boundary, date and time when data have been last updated and published, number of people who have tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA, the number of confirmed cases of COVID-19, the number of hospital admissions with confirmed COVID-19.
All results from diagnostic and confirmatory tests to detect the RNA of SARS-CoV-2 virus causing COVID-19 for Wisconsin residents are reported to the Wisconsin Department of Health Services (DHS), then entered and aggregated by the Wisconsin Electronic Disease Surveillance System (WEDSS).
COVID-19 cases are defined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
[38].
If a person had more than one positive result based on the standard diagnostic test, such cases are counted as a confirmed case only once.
The data are preprocessed to clean and validate the dataset before estimating the effective \(R_t\) and cases.
The missing values are imputed using linear interpolation by fitting a line between last and next observed values.
The monotonicity issue of ascending cumulative cases because of removing or reassigning cases after receiving new information is remedied by retroactively correcting for decrease in cumulative cases.
The number of new positive cases is smoothed using generalized additive models for test positivity by date based on a quasibinomial family
[39, 40].
The corrected positive cases are calculated by taking the product of the new positive cases and a correction factor described below adjusting for underreporting [41,42,43].
The correction factor is specific to the Wisconsin dataset and defined as the ratio of the smoothed test positivity for a given county on a given day and the 2.5 percentile of smoothed test positivities for all counties on the same date.
The data are filtered to include the time period from September 20, 2020 to December 6, 2020 corresponding to a COVID-19 surge in Wisconsin.
The data are aggregated by healthcare emergency readiness coalition (HERC) regions of a core group of hospitals and healthcare organizations, local and tribal public health agencies, state, regional, and local and tribal emergency management, and emergency medical services, as well as additional members.
Wisconsin has seven HERC regions that support communities during disasters and other health-related crises by allocating resources [44].
The positive cases corrected for missing values, monotonicity, and test positivity are directly used to estimate the cases, effective reproduction number, and hospitalizations as illustrated in Fig.
1.
Fig.
1 Workflow for estimating and forecasting cases and hospitalizations by Wisconsin HERC region Full size image
Estimated cases by date of infection and time-varying effective reproduction number \(R_{t}\)
The time-varying effective reproduction number \(R_t\) is estimated using a Bayesian latent variable model from a range of open-source tools and current best practices [33, 36].
The model assumes that limited time series data for case counts are available by date of symptom onset and instead uses date of report.
The data are then imputed to case counts by date of infection using a frequency distribution for the reporting delay and incubation period as described below.
Binomial upscaling was used to increase the estimated numbers of case onsets close to the present to account for right truncation.
Time-varying estimates of the reproduction number are estimated by date of infection including uncertainty from a frequency distribution for the generation time as described below.
The time-varying reproduction number is forecasted 7-days forward in time to remain constant.
The \(R_t\) and the corresponding case forecasts are implemented in the R package EpiNow2
[45].
The initial number of infections is estimated using a prior distribution based on the initial number of cases.
Previous infections are weighted by the generation time probability mass function (w), summed, and multiplied by the \(R_t\) for the infections at time t (\(I_t\)).
A log normal prior distribution with mean 1 and standard deviation 1 is used for the reproduction number (\(R_0\)).
The infection trajectories are used to calculate mean reported cases (\(D_t\)) for each incubation period and report delay distribution (convolved into \(\xi\)).
Observed reported cases (\(C_t\)) are generated from a negative binomial distribution with a mean \(D_t\) multiplied by a day of the week effect (\(\omega _{(t \, mod \, 7)}\)) and an overdispersion parameter \(\phi\).
An exponential prior distribution with mean 1 is used to generate the overdispersion parameter \(\phi\).
Lastly, randomness is introduced using an approximate Gaussian process with a squared exponential kernel (GP)
[33, 36].
The equations for estimating the time-varying reproduction number \(R_t\) and nowcasting reported infections are defined below.
$$\begin{aligned} R_{t}\sim & {} R_{t-1} \times \mathrm {GP} \\ I_{t}= & {} R_{t} \sum _{\tau } w_{\tau } I_{t-\tau } \\ D_{t}= & {} \sum _{\tau } \xi _{\tau } I_{t-\tau } \\ C_{t}\sim & {} \mathrm {NB}\left( D_{t} \omega _{(t \, mod \, 7)}, \phi \right) \end{aligned}$$
A log-normal distribution is fit to estimate the reporting delay with appropriate uncertainty using 100 subsampled bootstraps of a log-normal distribution of \(\mu =6\) and \(\sigma =1\)
[41,42,43].
For computational purposes, the maximum allowed delay is set to be 30 days.
Each date is rounded to the nearest day and truncated to the maximum observed delay accounting for left and right censoring.
The generation time follows a gamma distribution with a mean of 3.6 days and a standard deviation of 3.1 days and the incubation period follows a log-normal distribution with a mean of 1.6 days and a standard deviation of 0.418 days
[34, 35].
The time-series is truncated to include the last 28 days of data and a rolling average for the prior of 7 days is taken based on reported cases.
The effective \(R_t\) is fitted every week and forecasted over a 1-day, 3-day, and 7-day time horizon, then transformed into a case forecast.
The parameters of the Gaussian process kernel are estimated during model fitting.
The prior on the magnitude is standard normal.
Each timeseries is fit independently using Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).
Two chains are used with a warmup of 200 each and 1000 samples post warmup.
Convergence is assessed using the R hat diagnostic.
Estimated hospitalization by date of admission
The number of hospitalization admissions is estimated using a Bayesian generalized non-linear multivariate multilevel model implemented in the R package brms [46].
A log-normal distribution is fit to estimate the hospitalization (\(H_t\)).
A flat prior for each region \(\mu _t\) is used.
The model is fit with a smoothing term for the date \(\psi _t\) to estimate the local linear trend and a random effect term for day of the week \(\gamma _t\) to estimate the seasonal pattern.
The prior on the random effect term is defaulted to student-t with a mean of 0, a standard deviation of 2.5, and 3 degrees of freedom.
For computational purposes, the time-series is truncated to include the last 28 days of data by date of admission and the hospitalization is fitted every week and forecasted over a 1-day, 3-day, and 7-day time horizon.
Each timeseries is fit independently using Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).
Two chains are used with a warmup of 1000 each and 1000 samples post warmup.
Convergence is assessed using the R hat diagnostic.
The equations for nowcasting hospitalization admissions are defined below.
$$\begin{aligned} H_{t}= & {} \mu _t
+
\gamma _t
+
\varepsilon _t \\ \mu _t= & {} \mu + \psi _t
+ \eta _{\psi ,t} \end{aligned}$$
Computed coverage probability of the Bayesian credible interval
The Bayesian credible interval is the range of values from the posterior distribution containing the credible probability, given the observed data at a specific level.
The coverage probability is the proportion of values for \(R_t\), cases, and hospitalizations that are contained in the forecasted credible interval [47].
The \(R_t\), cases, and hospitalizations are forecasted over a 1-day, 3-day, and 7-day time horizon using the last 28 days of data, and the 20%, 50%, and 90% Bayesian credible intervals of the forecasts are calculated.
The credible probability of the \(R_t\) and cases is the proportion of the Bayesian credible interval that contains their respective estimated median values.
The estimated median values for \(R_t\) and cases are computed for the dates of interest using the model fitted the data 14 days later.
In contrast, the credible probability of the hospitalizations uses their observed values instead of the estimated median values.
Software requirements
All analyses are performed using the statistical programming language R version 4.0.3
[48].
The analyses include estimating the effective \(R_t\), cases, and hospitalizations by date of infection as well as automating the workflow and building an interactive for the effective \(R_t\) time series data by Wisconsin HERC regions.
The EM Resources and COVID-19 Historical Data by County datasets are retrieved from the Wisconsin Department of Health Services and cleaned prior to calculating the adjusted case counts and plotting the effective \(R_t\), cases, and hospitalizations using the R package tidyverse version 1.3.0
[49].
All real-time case counts and time-varying epidemiological parameters are computed by means of the R package EpiNow2 version 1.1.0 [45] implementing a Bayesian latent variable approach using Stan.
Correcting reported cases for under-reporting is performed using the R package mgcv version 1.8-33 [50].
All real-time hospitalization counts are computed by means of the R package brms version 2.15.0
[46, 51] fitting a Bayesian regression model using Stan.
All visualizations are created using the R package ggplot2 version 3.3.2
[52] and translated to add interactivity by means of the R package plotly version 4.9.2.2
[53] powered by the JavaScript library plotly.js.
The two R packages are used to apply the consistent and expressive interface for exploring statistical summaries across Wisconsin counties.
Geofaceting of the HERC regions map for the state of Wisconsin is performed using the R package geofacet version 0.2.0
[54].
All analyses described above are updated daily for each region and the visualization is implemented as a webpage: https://data-viz.it.wisc.edu/cases-r-hosp-geofacet-wi-region/
[55].
In a unanimous vote, the 21 members of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)’s vaccine committee recommended an update to the COVID-19 vaccine to better match the viral strains currently circulating in the country and around the world.
The panel voted to move away from the current bivalent vaccine, which is designed to tackle the original virus and BA.4 and BA.5 variants, to a vaccine that is better able to protect against the XBB family of variants.
The half a dozen different versions of XBB viruses account for nearly all new infections in the U.S., with two—XBB.1.5 and XBB.1.16—currently dominating.
The group decided that the vaccine should also target only one of the XBB strains since the many XBB viruses are closely related.
There was general agreement that the strain should be XBB.1.5, which currently causes the most cases in the U.S., but it will be up to the FDA to make that final determination.
The committee heard from vaccine makers Moderna, Pfizer-BioNTech, and Novavax, all of whom provided data showing that prototype vaccines their scientists made against XBB.1.5 and XBB.1.16 produce about equally robust levels of antibodies against either version of the virus, as well as against other rising variants like XBB.2.3.
The manufacturers also provided data showing that the number of mutations separating the XBB strains was very small—on the order of two or three changes—which suggests that to the immune system, the variants essentially appear the same.
Deciding which strain to include
The committee’s vote was based on several lines of evidence showing that the protection offered by existing vaccines wanes against newer virus variants.
While the vaccines continue to protect against severe disease and death, better matching the currently circulating versions of the virus to the strains targeted by the vaccines would provide more protection against infection as well.
The committee’s recommendation to update the COVID-19 vaccine is in line with a number of international public health groups’ guidance; in May, both the World Health Organization (WHO)’s
COVID-19 vaccine advisory group and the International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities also recommended moving to an updated COVID-19 vaccine that targets a single XBB strain, and the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control and the European Medicines Agency in June also jointly concluded that an XBB strain is “adequate to ensure cross-reactivity against current dominant and emerging strains.”
While many public-health experts had predicted that any vaccines following the initial shots first developed and deployed at the end of 2020 might be more effective if they generated protection against more than one strain of the virus, the committee saw studies from the three vaccine makers showing that prototype shots tested in animals that targeted two XBB strains did not produce appreciably higher levels of antibodies to neutralize the major XBB viruses than shots that targeted only one XBB strain.
Moderna also provided early data in about 100 people who received the company’s experimental XBB.1.5 vaccine as a booster dose, either alone or combined with company’s BA.4/5 vaccine, and the monovalent shot produced higher levels of virus-fighting antibodies against both the XBB.1.5 and XBB.1.16 viruses compared to the bivalent vaccine.
Toward a new dosing schedule
While the committee voted to update the vaccine to include an XBB variant, the experts were still divided over how often the COVID-19 vaccine should be given in the U.S.
In previous meetings, the committee leaned toward an annual shot—similar to the flu shot—which would be ready before the fall respiratory disease season and would be an easy way for people to remember to get a COVID-19 vaccine.
But because the virus mutates so quickly, health officials may need to monitor changes in variants more frequently.
Kanta Subbarao, chair of the WHO’s strain selection committee, told the FDA’s advisory committee that her group plans on meeting twice a year to ensure that the COVID-19 vaccine doesn’t fall too far behind the ever-evolving virus.
Some members of the FDA panel agreed that it’s important to monitor, and potentially update, COVID-19 vaccines more frequently, and expressed discomfort with the idea of yoking COVID-19 vaccination to flu vaccination schedules.
They noted that there is no definitive data showing that SARS-CoV-2 follows a seasonal pattern like influenza does, given how rapidly and prodigiously it produces new variants that quickly replace previous ones.
“I don’t know that we know the seasonality of SARS-CoV-2 yet,” said Pamela McInnes, former deputy director of the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences at the National Institutes of Health.
“Maybe we are going to be [continually] chasing this one.”
Other experts, including scientists from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the WHO, pointed to the fact that the virus seems to be evolving and mutating in a linear, potentially more predictable fashion, and not picking up old mutations or reverting to earlier strains.
That could make the vaccine easier to update on a more regular basis.
Dr. Peter Marks, director of the Center for Biologics Evaluation & Research at the FDA, countered with a practical argument, noting that even if variants change more frequently than every 12 months, vaccine makers and health officials would need time to both test candidates in animals and in the lab for safety and efficacy, and to manufacture sufficient numbers of doses.
He also focused on the urgent need to provide the public a more regular framework with which to approach COVID-19 vaccination, rather than the haphazard nature that’s driven the release of new COVID-19 vaccines over the last three years.
More consistency and reliability for the public would hopefully lead to higher numbers of people getting vaccinated.
“We have not done a good job of communicating to the American public what is going on because they are still not getting these vaccines in the ways we would like to see,” he said.
Determining who needs new shots
Some members brought up another issue: whether everyone should be getting the updated vaccine.
People now have substantially higher levels of immunity than they did when the vaccines were first deployed—both from vaccinations, boosters, and COVID-19 infections.
That protection comes not only from antibodies against specific variants, but also from T cells that provide longer-lasting and broader protection against a larger number of virus variants.
T cell-based immunity is the reason why people with prior exposure to the virus are still largely protected from severe disease, hospitalization, and death, even if they may not still have appreciable levels of antibodies against the latest variants.
Because T-cell immunity is conserved, Dr. Paul Offit, professor of pediatrics at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, questioned whether everyone would need to get an updated vaccine on a regular basis.
“We need to continue to define who those at highest risk of severe disease are,”—including the elderly and those who are immunocompromised—”and who may benefit from a booster, and not make this a recommendation for everybody for every season.”
Not everyone will necessarily benefit from a booster, he said.
The decision about who should get vaccinated, and how often, will fall to the CDC’s immunization committee, which will meet once the FDA makes a final decision based on the panel’s recommendation to update the COVID-19 vaccine.
If the FDA does greenlight an updated vaccine, manufacturers say they’re ready to produce enough doses to start immunizing people in the fall.
Both Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech rely on new mRNA technology which has the advantage of speed over older technologies, and could lead to new vaccines in as soon as six weeks.
Most of the manufacturers have begun making versions of the XBB.1.5 vaccines, and Pfizer-BioNTech told the committee it could deliver XBB.1.5 vaccines as early as July, an XBB.1.16 vaccine by August, and any other formulation by October.
While Moderna did not reveal its timeline, because it uses the same technology, the company would likely be able to manufacture doses in a similar timeframe.
Novavax, however, uses a different platform that involves creating recombinant viral proteins, so the company said that it would take about six months to produce sufficient doses of an XBB.1.5 vaccine.
Case numbers for infections like Strep A, flu and RSV have risen since the pandemic.
In the US, it’s estimated that, so far this season, there have been at least 24 million illnesses, 260,000 hospitalizations and 16,000 deaths from flu.
There has also been increased drug resistance in bacteria causing bloodstream infections.
During pandemic-related lockdowns, it wasn’t just the spread of COVID-19 being halted.
Inevitably, other infections also waned, as school children stayed at home, offices closed their doors and face masks became a normal public sight.
Now, with societies opened up again, infections are on the rise, with one expert telling Sky News that they’re worse or more prolific because “lack of mixing in kids may have caused a drop in population-wide immunity”.
Here are four illnesses that are currently on the increase.
Strep A
Strep A is a type of bacteria found in the throat and on the skin “that usually causes fever and throat infections, such as strep throat or scarlet fever,” according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
In rare cases it can be deadly.
Symptoms to look out for in babies or young children that may indicate severe illness include “irritability, difficulty waking, high-pitched crying, refusal to eat/feed, fewer or no wet nappies or decreased urination, cold or mottled limbs and difficulty breathing,” according to ABC News.
This graphic shows how Strep A infection cases have spiked in the UK, following the pandemic.
Image: UK Government.
RSV
RSV is a common respiratory virus that causes infections of the lungs and respiratory tract in babies under two and older adults with pre-existing conditions.
An estimated 60,000-120,000 older adults in the United States are hospitalized from RSV each year, and 6,000-10,000 die, the CDC says.
Late last year, the American Academy of Pediatrics reported that about three-quarters of US hospital beds for children were full, partly due to the increase in RSV infections.
Dr Emily Martin, an associate professor of epidemiology at the University of Michigan School of Public Health, told the New York Times that case numbers are on the rise as children were shielded from common infections during COVID-19 lockdowns.
“If a child is born in the summer and they get exposed for the first time in the winter, they are at risk of having more serious disease,” she said.
“But many infants didn’t experience the first RSV season on the regular schedule that they would have, particularly if they were born in or after 2020.”
Influenza
Case numbers increased last year, with people reporting bare shelves in the flu section at pharmacies and grocery stores, but they are now declining in most areas of the US, the CDC reports.
Antimicrobial resistance is high
Increased drug resistance in bacteria causing bloodstream infections, including against last-resort antibiotics, was seen in the first year of the coronavirus pandemic, a World Health Organization report based on data from 87 countries in 2020 showed.
The overuse and/or misuse of antibiotics has helped microbes to become resistant to many treatments, while the pipeline of replacement therapies in development is alarmingly sparse, Reuters reports.
Rates of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) remain very high, but last-resort antibiotics are only just starting to lose potency, said Dr Carmem Pessoa-Silva, the lead for WHO Global Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance System.
"We have a very narrow window of opportunity … for responding to the threat," she warned.
Discover What is the World Economic Forum doing to manage emerging risks from COVID-19?
Show more The first global pandemic in more than 100 years, COVID-19 has spread throughout the world at an unprecedented speed.
At the time of writing, 4.5 million cases have been confirmed and more than 300,000 people have died due to the virus.
As countries seek to recover, some of the more long-term economic, business, environmental, societal and technological challenges and opportunities are just beginning to become visible.
To help all stakeholders – communities, governments, businesses and individuals understand the emerging risks and follow-on effects generated by the impact of the coronavirus pandemic, the World Economic Forum, in collaboration with Marsh and McLennan and Zurich Insurance Group, has launched its COVID-19 Risks Outlook: A Preliminary Mapping and its Implications - a companion for decision-makers, building on the Forum’s annual Global Risks Report.
The report reveals that the economic impact of COVID-19 is dominating companies’ risks perceptions.
Companies are invited to join the Forum’s work to help manage the identified emerging risks of COVID-19 across industries to shape a better future.
Read the full COVID-19 Risks Outlook: A Preliminary Mapping and its Implications report here, and our impact story with further information.
The city is seeing an “uptick” in COVID-19, flu and respiratory syncytial virus cases, Mayor Eric Adams said this week, and health officials are warning that the so-called “triple threat” of the three illnesses could worsen in the coming months.
Here’s what you need to know about the viruses, from how to protect yourself from them to how many infections the city is seeing.
What is respiratory syncytial virus?
Respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, is a respiratory virus that usually causes cold-like symptoms, including a runny nose, poor appetite, coughing, sneezing, fever and wheezing, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says.
The virus can spread via coughs, sneezes, surfaces and direct contact, according to the CDC.
Most people who get infected experience mild symptoms and recover within a week or two, but the virus “can be serious, especially for infants and older adults,” the CDC says.
“Each year in the United States, an estimated 58,000 children younger than 5 years old are hospitalized due to RSV infection,” the CDC says on its website.
Premature infants, children who have weakened immune systems and children under the age of 2 who have chronic lung disease are among those most susceptible to “severe illness,” the CDC notes.
Why has RSV been in the news recently?
While RSV usually circulates in the late fall, winter and spring, the U.S. has seen an early surge in pediatric RSV cases this year that has put a strain on some hospitals.
The New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene logged around 400 positive RSV test results the week of Sept. 17, according to the department’s most recent influenza surveillance report.
By the week of Oct. 15, that number had jumped to around 1,600 — up by 60% from the same week last year, when the department recorded close to 1,000 RSV cases.
Nationwide, 7,993 RSV test results came back positive the week of Oct. 15, up from 3,034 the week of Sept. 17 and nearly double the 4,005 positive results that came back the week of Oct. 16 last year, CDC data shows.
Dr. Edith Bracho-Sanchez, a pediatrician at NewYork-Presbyterian/Columbia University Irving Medical Center, said in a hospital Q&A video that the facility is “definitely seeing an uptick in respiratory illnesses, including but not limited to RSV.”
“Unfortunately, they came earlier than we’re used to, and they came in higher numbers this season,” Bracho-Sanchez said.
In an interview with NY1, Dr. Jessica Justman, an infectious disease specialist and epidemiologist who serves as associate professor of medicine in epidemiology at Columbia Mailman School of Public Health, said she wasn’t surprised by the increase.
“We’ve now had a couple of winters of people being more careful than usual, masking and staying in, and so people have had less exposure to flu and respiratory syncytial virus for a couple of years,” Justman said.
“And so I think that our immune systems are, a little bit, in a lower state of response for these pathogens.”
What do health officials mean by a “triple threat”?
Health officials have been referring to the combination of RSV, COVID-19 and flu as a “triple threat” because they are all circulating simultaneously — and could all fuel a spike in respiratory illnesses in the coming months.
In an interview with Spectrum News, the White House’s COVID-19 response coordinator, Dr. Ashish Jha, said he was worried about the confluence of the three viruses.
“It is concerning to see three respiratory viruses, all of which are very contagious, all of which are rising at the same time,” Jha said.
Justman noted that the city “[hasn’t] really had a winter yet where all three infections are circulating at high levels.”
“I think… in talking about the ‘triple threat,’ I’d emphasize the word ‘threat,’” she added.
“It’s something to potentially anticipate and be prepared for, but it doesn’t mean that it’s already here.”
Where do COVID-19 and flu stand in New York City currently?
As of Thursday, New York City’s seven-day infection rate stood at 9.0%, down from 9.3% on Wednesday.
COVID-19-related deaths were holding steady, with hospitalizations on the decline, the health department said.
“Influenza activity” in the city, meanwhile, was still “low” as of Oct. 15, according to the department’s influenza surveillance report.
“Approximately 1% of all specimens submitted for influenza testing were positive for influenza; 390 specimens were positive for influenza A and 25 specimens were positive for influenza B,” the report said.
The city did see two flu outbreaks at long-term care facilities the week of Oct. 15, but did not see any “influenza-associated pediatric deaths,” the report added.
Asked about the “triple threat” at a news conference on Wednesday, the mayor said the city was “seeing an uptick” in flu, COVID-19 and RSV cases, but added that it wasn’t a concern for hospitals.
“We believe our health care infrastructure system, we’re in a good place.
We have it under control,” Adams said.
“And so there’s no real alarms that we’re seeing now, but we want to continue to encourage boosters, vaccines.
That’s the key.”
How can you tell which virus you or your child has?
Distinguishing between the viruses’ symptoms can be difficult, health care providers say.
“We have this situation that we haven’t really encountered before, and they all kind of overlap a bit in their symptoms and presentation, so it kind of introduces a level of confusion,” Dr. Denis Nash, a distinguished professor of epidemiology at the CUNY School of Public Health, said in an interview with NY1.
“I think if you have any symptoms, you have to assume that it’s one of these three things, none of which are good for anyone else, and to sequester, isolate,” Nash added.
In her video Q&A, Bracho-Sanchez, acknowledged that it “is so hard to tell the difference between RSV, COVID and flu, even for us as physicians.”
“As a parent, know that [with] most illnesses, whether respiratory illnesses or in cold and flu season, most kids are totally fine at home,” she said.
“But always, always be on the lookout for difficulty breathing, a fever that lasts longer than three days, or a fever in a kid who’s younger than two months.”
Justman, meanwhile, noted that it is “possible to have, in theory… an infection with all three viruses at the same time.”
“We have better access to COVID rapid tests, so that will be helpful,” she said, but added that New Yorkers would have to visit a hospital or health care provider’s office to get tested for other “respiratory pathogens.”
What can New Yorkers do to prevent illness?
While there is no vaccine to prevent RSV — only preventive treatments given to high-risk children under the age of 2 — New Yorkers can heed the advice they have heard repeatedly throughout the pandemic to avoid infections, Justman said.
New Yorkers should wash their hands frequently, avoid touching their faces and use hand sanitizer, as the virus “will live on surfaces,” she said.
And as with COVID-19, masks will help prevent flu and RSV infections.
“So if you are at all willing to wear masks still, it will help protect you against all three viruses,” Justman said.
New Yorkers should also make sure to get their bivalent COVID-19 booster shots and flu shots, she added.
As of two weeks ago, the city had only administered around 363,000 bivalent booster shots, health officials said.
Low bivalent booster rates could push hospitalizations upward, Justman noted.
“The major potential issue would be overwhelming our hospital systems with people who have severe respiratory tract infections,” like pneumonia, she said.
“At the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, we heard about the importance of ‘flattening the curve’ in order to preserve hospital bed capacity,” she added.
“This would be the same issue, but instead of COVID-19 as the only ‘driver,’ it would potentially be driven by all three respiratory viruses.”
What will the next few months look like for the city?
Nash on Thursday said it would be difficult to pinpoint a potential “peak” in infections.
“It seems to be increasing now, but we’ve never really had a situation where all three of these pathogens were circulating at once,” he said.
“I think the interplay between them, since we don’t know how it could play out, makes it a little hard to predict.”
New York will either see case counts comparable to other parts of the country or deal with a “more severe experience” due to its density, Justman said.
“And things that can spread through respiratory transmission just tend to really do that particularly well in densely populated areas,” she said, adding that international travel into and out of the city could fuel cases.
Like Justman, Bracho-Sanchez emphasized taking basic hygiene precautions.
She also advised parents with concerns about RSV or other viruses to reach out to their children’s health care providers.
“It’s really hard to know what’s going to happen the rest of the fall and winter, but I think we’re going to continue to see high levels of RSV circulating in our community,” she said in her Q&A.
“We are also going to see flu begin to circulate soon, in even higher levels than we have seen, and we might have a wave of COVID-19 circulating in our community, in addition to [other] viruses that we don’t often test for.”
The first lady had tested positive for the coronavirus last week.
Jill Biden ends COVID-19 isolation after testing negative, will rejoin president on vacation
First lady Jill Biden will end her COVID-19 isolation on Sunday after receiving two consecutive negative tests and quarantining for five days, the White House announced.
Her spokeswoman Elizabeth Alexander said in a statement that she will leave South Carolina and join President Joe Biden in Rehoboth Beach, Delaware, where he is vacationing.
Jill Biden had previously tested positive for the coronavirus last week while vacationing in South Carolina with her husband.
After becoming infected, she remained at a private residence after the president left the Palmetto State.
It does not appear that the first lady's case was serious.
She experienced cold-like symptoms Monday and was prescribed the antiviral treatment Paxlovid, her spokeswoman said.
She was also able to join meetings via Zoom Thursday.
First lady Dr. Jill Biden delivers remarks during a Cancer Moonshot initiative event in the East Room of the White House, Feb., 02, 2022.
Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images, FILE
"She's feeling well," the president told ABC News last week.
He was considered a close contact of the first lady and, as such, started masking while indoors around others for 10 days starting from Jill Biden's positive test.
President Biden has since tested negative for COVID-19.
He recently recovered from COVID himself: He first tested positive on July 21 and experienced mild symptoms like a sore throat and cough.
He too received Paxlovid and ultimately tested negative before experiencing a mild rebound infection and testing positive for a second time, sending him back into quarantine.
The president's physician announced on Aug. 6 that he had again tested negative.
ABC News' Justin Gomez and Molly Nagle contributed to this report.
WASHINGTON (AP) — Updated COVID-19 vaccines may be getting a little easier for adults to find but they’re still frustratingly scarce for young children.
Health officials said Thursday the kid shots have started shipping — and reminded most everyone to get a fall flu shot too.
About 2 million Americans have gotten the new COVID-19 shot in the two weeks since its approval despite early barriers from insurance companies and other glitches, according to the Department of Health and Human Services.
For the first time, the U.S. has vaccines to fight a trio of viruses that cause fall and winter misery.
But health officials worry that shot fatigue and hassles in getting them will leave too many people needlessly unprotected.
“We need to use them,” Dr. Mandy Cohen, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said Thursday.
“Right now is the right time.”
A flu vaccination and that updated COVID-19 shot are urged for just about everyone, starting with babies as young as 6 months.
Also this year, a vaccine against another scary virus called RSV is recommended for people 60 and older and for certain pregnant women.
And for babies, a vaccinelike medicine to guard against that respiratory syncytial virus is expected to arrive next month.
“These vaccines may not be perfect in being able to prevent absolutely every infection with these illnesses, but they turn a wild infection into a milder one,” said Dr. William Schaffner of Vanderbilt University and the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases.
Some things to know:
WHY DO I NEED ANOTHER COVID-19 SHOT?
This year’s vaccine is updated to protect against newer versions of the constantly evolving coronavirus.
Already there’s been a late summer jump in infections, hospitalizations and deaths.
And so far the new vaccine recipe appears to be a good match to the variants currently circulating.
Protection against COVID-19, whether from vaccination or from an earlier infection, wanes over time — and most Americans haven’t had a vaccine dose in about a year.
Everyone 5 and older will need just one shot this fall even if they’ve never had a prior vaccination, while younger children may need additional doses depending on their vaccination and infection history.
HOW HARD IS IT TO FIND COVID-19 SHOTS?
The rollout’s start has been messy.
This time the government isn’t buying and distributing shots for free.
Now drugstores, doctors’ offices and other providers had to place their own orders, and sometimes canceled appointments if supplies didn’t arrive in time.
Some people had to wait for their insurance companies to update the billing codes needed to cover them or risk paying out of pocket.
Manufacturers Pfizer and Moderna have shipped millions of doses, and say there’s plenty of supply — and in recent days, more appointments have started opening, at least for people 12 and older.
In a Wednesday meeting, insurance companies told HHS Secretary Xavier Becerra they’ve largely resolved the paperwork issues blocking some patients’ vaccinations.
The shots are supposed to be provided free in-network to the insured.
For the uninsured or underinsured, CDC has opened what it’s calling a “bridge” program to provide free shots at certain sites.
WHY CAN’T PARENTS FIND COVID-19 SHOTS FOR YOUNGER KIDS?
Adult doses got shipped first, CDC’s Cohen said.
Doses for the under-12 set have begun shipping, and “the supply is filling out,” she said.
Drugstore chain CVS said its doses for ages 5 and older began arriving last week, although supplies vary by location, while its MinuteClinic locations anticipate opening appointments for tots as young as 18 months in the coming days.
As for pediatricians, they’ve had to guess how many doses to buy up-front while waiting to learn how much insurance companies would reimburse them for each shot, said Dr. Jesse Hackell of the American Academy of Pediatrics.
He said early parent demand is heartening but that pediatricians expect to spend lots of time this fall explaining to hesitant families how important COVID-19 vaccination is even for healthy children.
On Friday, Pfizer said it was making some changes in hopes of motivating pediatricians to buy more shots for children under 5 — including offering a refund for doses that go unused, even partially used vials.
In Redmond, Washington, Ania Mitros got herself, her husband and her 13-year-old vaccinated pretty easily but despite calls to multiple pharmacies and clinics can’t find anyone to tell her when shots for her 8- and 11-year-old will be available.
“There need to be clear expectations,” she said.
WHAT ABOUT FLU VACCINE?
Fewer Americans got a flu vaccine last year than before the coronavirus pandemic –- a discouraging gap that CDC hopes to reverse.
People need a flu vaccine every fall because influenza also mutates each year.
Like with COVID-19, flu is most dangerous to older adults, the very young and people with weak immune systems, lung, heart or other chronic health problems, or who are pregnant.
There are multiple kinds of flu vaccines, including a nasal spray version for certain younger people.
More important, three kinds are specifically recommended for seniors because they do a better job revving up an older adult’s immune system.
CAN I GET A FLU SHOT AND COVID-19 SHOT AT THE SAME TIME?
Yes, although one in each arm might be more comfortable.
WHO NEEDS THE NEW RSV VACCINE?
RSV is a cold-like nuisance for most people, and not as well-known as the flu.
But RSV packs hospitals every winter and kills several hundred tots and thousands of seniors.
The CDC says already, RSV cases are rising in the Southeast.
RSV vaccines from GSK and Pfizer are approved for adults 60 and older.
Drugstores have adequate supplies but some seniors are reporting hurdles such as requirements to get a prescription.
That’s because the CDC recommended that seniors talk with their doctors about the new vaccine.
Cohen said it was meant just for education about a virus that people may not know much about.
“We want folks to ... get access to the vaccine as quickly as possible,” she said.
WHAT ABOUT BABIES AND RSV?
The FDA also has approved Pfizer’s RSV vaccine to be given late in pregnancy so moms-to-be pass virus-fighting antibodies to their fetuses, offering some protection at birth.
The CDC is recommending that pregnancy vaccinations be offered between September and January, when RSV tends to be most common.
There’s no vaccine for children but babies whose mothers didn’t get vaccinated in pregnancy may get an injection of lab-made antibodies to guard against RSV.
Called Beyfortus, the one-dose shot from Sanofi and AstraZeneca is different than a vaccine, which teaches the body to make its own infection-fighting antibodies, but is similarly protective.
Cohen said it should be available in October.
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Science and Educational Media Group.
The AP is solely responsible for all content.
After months of very low activity, COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations are rising in New Jersey, mirroring a national trend as a new variant has begun spreading globally and locally.
But the number of New Jerseyans getting severely ill or dying from the virus remains very low compared to the post-holiday surge in January, Health Department data shows.
Still, some public health experts are concerned.
Perry Halkitis, dean of the Rutgers School of Public Health, said the latest data makes him worried over where New Jersey is "heading with COVID-19 in the next two months.
"
"Given these trends and that the updated booster is not available until October, serious concerns exist about even greater spread in the foreseeable future," Halkitis said.
A new variant called "Eris" has been blamed for a rise in COVID in parts of the globe.
NJ newsNJ business owner with stark change in fortune is at center of Menendez investigation
Eris − a nickname given to the EG.5 subvariant of Omicron − has become the most prevalent strain in the U.S. in recent weeks but only at 17% of cases.
according to Centers for Disease Control estimates.
In New Jersey and New York, it accounted for 16% of cases from July 23 to Aug. 5 making it the second-most common variant in the region.
There were at least 18 variants circulating in both states during those two weeks.
Weekly positive cases in New Jersey have more than doubled in a month to 1,580 in the week ending Aug. 5 − the highest since April 1, according to state data.
While those numbers may continue to increase especially when school resumes next month, Health Department officials don't expect a significant surge or any strain on hospitals from a wave of COVID admissions, said Nancy Kearney, a department spokeswoman.
One reason for the increase "is that the newest variants are more contagious and better able to evade our immune responses," Kearny said.
"Vaccine protection does wane over time, which is why we continue to encourage residents to stay up-to-date.
"
COVID hospitalizations in New Jersey were at 260 on Monday night, the highest total since late April.
But the number of COVID patients in intensive care was 23.
Only five were on ventilators among 69 of 70 hospitals reporting.
In contrast, the annual surge following the December holidays caused a high of 919 in intensive care on Jan. 11 and 78 on ventilators on Jan. 15.
COVID deaths have been in the single digits for all but three weeks since late March.
During the post-holiday surge, there was an average of 52 deaths a week in January.
As with the entire pandemic, the elderly and those with underlying health conditions have been getting sick more than younger, healthier individuals, Kearney said.
As of Aug. 3, COVID transmission was low in all of New Jersey's 21 counties as it has been since late March, according to the latest Health Department report.
New study reports the longest follow-up period of neurologic symptoms impacting non-hospitalized COVID-19 ‘long-haulers’
Most non-hospitalized COVID-19 “long-haulers” at the Northwestern Medicine Neuro COVID-19 Clinic continued to experience symptoms such as brain fog, numbness and tingling, headache, dizziness, blurred vision, tinnitus and fatigue an average of 15 months after disease onset, according to a new study published in Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology.
Scientists analyzed patients six to nine months after their initial visit to the Neuro COVID-19 Clinic and discovered heart rate, blood pressure variation and gastrointestinal symptoms increased in so-called long-haulers, while loss of taste and smell decreased overall.
“This new study is novel and reports the longest follow-up period of neurologic symptoms impacting non-hospitalized patients suffering from long-COVID anywhere in the world,” said Igor Koralnik, MD, chief of Neuro-infectious Diseases and Global Neurology in the Department of Neurology, who oversees the Neuro COVID-19 Clinic.
“We were surprised by the persistence of most of the debilitating neurologic symptoms of our patients, and by the late appearance of symptoms that suggest dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system.”
Feinberg medical students Sareen Ali, Anthony Kang, Tulsi Patel and Jeffrey Clark were the lead authors of the study, and team members at the Neuro COVID-19 clinic.
Listen to an episode of the Breakthroughs Podcast with Igor Koralnik, MD:
Scientists studied patients evaluated initially between May and November 2020 who had mild initial COVID-19 symptoms — transient cough, sore throat, etc. — and were never required to be hospitalized for pneumonia or low oxygen levels.
Of the 52 patients who completed the follow-up study, the average age was 43, 73 percent were female, 77 percent received a COVID-19 vaccine, and most continued to experience neurologic symptoms, fatigue and compromised quality of life 11-18 months after disease onset, on average 15 months.
Overall, there was no significant change in the frequency of most neurologic symptoms between first and follow-up appointments including numbness/tingling (69 vs. 65 percent), headache (67 vs. 54 percent), dizziness (50 vs. 54 percent), blurred vision (34 vs. 44 percent), tinnitus (33 vs. 42 percent) and fatigue (87 vs. 81 percent).
While loss of taste (63 vs. 27 percent) and smell (58 vs. 21 percent) decreased overall, heart rate and blood pressure variation (35 vs. 56 percent) and gastrointestinal symptoms (27 vs. 48 percent) increased at follow-up.
Patients reported improvements in their recovery, cognitive function, and fatigue, but quality of life measures remained lower than the average population of the United States.
Seventy-seven percent of the patients were vaccinated for COVID-19, but the vaccine didn’t have a positive or detrimental impact on cognitive function or fatigue.
“Vaccination didn’t cure long COVID symptoms, but didn’t worsen them either, which is a reason given by some long-haulers for not getting vaccinated,” Koralnik said.
“As new variants emerge and the number of patients impacted by long COVID rises, we’re now focusing our research on understanding the root cause of long COVID.
We’re also devising interventions to improve the management of those patients and find the best treatment options for them.”
To date, the Northwestern Medicine Neuro COVID-19 Clinic has treated nearly 1,400 long-haulers from across the U.S. In March 2021, Koralnik and a team of investigators reported that that 85 percent of long-haulers experience four or more neurologic symptoms which impact their quality of life, and in some patients, their cognitive abilities.
ACTON – When Glen Cote of Acton drove to his appointment at CVS for the new COVID-19 vaccine, he was shocked to receive a text on his phone minutes before his appointment, letting him know that the vaccine would cost $190.99.
"Nightmare is the first word that comes to mind," he explained to WBZ-TV.
Cote is covered by MassHealth, the state's program for Medicaid.
The new COVID-19 shot was approved by the FDA and CDC about a week ago, with the vaccine to be shipped to area pharmacies.
Signs outside many CVS stores read "FREE FLU & COVID-19 vaccines here.
"
Instead, posts on social media show that several people nationwide are getting charged for the shot, anywhere between $125 and $190.
Glen Cote canceled his COVID booster appointment at CVS after getting a bill for $190.99.
CBS Boston
The new vaccines by Pfizer and Moderna are supposed to target newer variants.
Experts have recommended Americans get them along with their annual flu shots this year.
COVID-19 vaccines were free, covered by the federal government, until the Public Health Emergency ended earlier this year.
COVID-19 vaccines should be covered by most private and public health insurances.
According to both CVS and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the new vaccines have a new billing code for insurances – which has not been updated in all insurance plans, leading to the erroneous charge for people seeking out a vaccine in this first week.
"Some payers are still updating their systems and may not yet be set up to cover the updated COVID-19 vaccines.
If this happens, our pharmacy teams can help patients schedule an appointment for a later date," a CVS Spokesperson said.
Glen Cote is disappointed in the lack of a smooth rollout, and a lack of answers which led him to reach out to WBZ.
"I thought that we're supposed to take care of each other in the richest country on earth, and I can't even get a COVID booster to keep myself and my friends and family safe," he said.
His concern is the impact these planning hurdles could have on people in more complicated situations than his.
He has spent hours on the phone trying to figure out the issue.
"I'm some schmuck with a college degree in an Instagram account and there are people – like imagine if I had two kids and two part-time jobs or like two full-time jobs or something," he said.
One of the most intense debates in the pandemic accord negotiations is over how to fast-track the development and equitable rollout of vaccines and medicines, with pharmaceutical companies insisting that any infringement on intellectual property (IP) rights will stifle innovation and that voluntary arrangements are the way forward.
A recent event to showcase voluntary licensing arrangements during the COVID-19 pandemic was organised by the International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers & Associations (IFPMA).
It brought a range of pharma companies and their licensees, including MSD and licensee Dr Reddy’s Laboratories, Gilead and Ferozsons Laboratories, Pfizer and Biovac, and Johnson & Johnson and its licensee, Aspen Pharmacare.
The panellists expanded on how they voluntarily collaborated with each other and with governments across the world despite lockdowns and supply chain breakages – in an evident rebuttal to their critics who have cast IP rights as a key barrier to more equitable medicines access, saying that IP sharing must be mandatory, not voluntary, in future crises.
Expedited innovation – in difficult conditions
Since the beginning of the COVID pandemic, a total of 59 vaccines and 44 therapeutics have been approved, said Rasmus Hansen, CEO and founder of the global health analytics firm Airfinity.
In addition, 177 collaborations were created to manufacture and commercialise COVID-19 treatments, including 93 voluntary licensing agreements for COVID-19 treatments.
Of the 93 voluntary licensing agreements, 84 are currently active, including 80 in developing countries.
“What we are finding here is pretty much all of the manufacturing announcements involved some kind of collaboration,” Hansen remarked.
“I remember we looked at the numbers week on week, and were really astonished to see the output coming from the manufacturers at that point.”
Voluntary licensing facilitated swift action
The COVID-19 pandemic laid the existing inequity in access to vaccines and therapeutics threadbare.
While high-income countries were able to enter into advance purchase agreements with big pharma companies long before the vaccines were ready, low and middle-income countries were forced to navigate arrangements for the local production of new vaccines and medicines that had been developed by the large pharma innovators.
South Africa’s Aspen Pharmacare collaborated with Johnson & Johnson to manufacture its COVID-19 vaccine under the name “Aspenovax”, for instance, while Biovac partnered with Pfizer to manufacture mRNA vaccines.
“The J&J vaccine was the one that was demonstrating the best prospects for Africa, given Africa’s idiosyncrasies, geographic supply chain and otherwise.
We got into discussions with J&J and we were able to move very swiftly to concluding an agreement,” explained Stavros Nicolaou, Aspen’s group senior executive for strategic trade.
Aspen was attractive to established companies, said Nicolaou, because of its “strong track record and also a blueprint in the form of voluntary licensing and technology transfers that existed already” as well as two decades of experience.
The technology transfer was completed five and a half months after the agreement was signed in December 2021, which was “not an easy task given the severe lockdowns” at that stage.
“It’s not like J&J colleagues could jump on a plane and, and travel down south and inspect facilities and do audits,” Nicolaou pointed out, adding that Aspen staff worked 24/7 doing on-camera audits “to give certainty and assurance around quality, safety and efficacy of our manufacturing”.
Political complications
However, due to a lack of demand for COVID-19 vaccines as the pandemic evolved and the company getting caught in the middle of a political crossfire between Africa and Europe that delayed production, Aspen Pharmacare did not sell a single vial of the vaccine, as reported previously by Health Policy Watch.
The political storm revolved around millions of J&J vaccines being produced in Aspen that were due for export to Europe at a time when only 7% of South Africans were vaccinated.
South Africa’s President Cyril Ramaphosa intervened, appealing to the Europe Commission head Ursula von der Leyen to prevent this and by September, European countries had agreed to return the J&J vaccines produced by Aspen for distribution in Africa.
“There was a standoff between Europe and the African Union in terms of where these vaccines would finally land,” Nicolaou explained at a previous webinar organised by Brown University.
“And it took quite significant negotiating and eventually, an agreement was settled between the EU and Africa for some of these vaccines, initially 60% and eventually 90%, to be retained on the African continent.”
Therapeutics partnerships
Later in the pandemic, as therapeutics also came online, Indian firm Dr Reddy’s Laboratories entered into a licensing agreement with the US-based MSD for the production of the antiviral drug molnupiravir, in January 2022.
A Pakistani company, Ferozsons Laboratories Limited, also partnered with the US-based Gilead Sciences to manufacture Remdesivir.
Both agreements were signed as voluntary licenses and as part of a long-term collaboration between these companies.
Despite bitter criticism that developing country markets still got access to such drugs much later and in far more limited quantities, the voluntary partnerships helped to build the capacity of firms in the global south to produce new forms of treatment, panelists said.
For instance, early engagement and a bilateral partnership with MSD helped Dr Reddy’s Laboratories mobilise the materials needed to manufacture molnupiravir swiftly, said Vignesh Shivnath, the company’s director of business development alliance management.
Dr Reddy’s Laboratories was one of eight generic manufacturers chosen by MSD for establishing bilateral manufacturing agreements.
“The direct agreements with Gilead helped us to ramp up technology transfers, quality control and manufacturing roll-out at breakneck speed,” said Osman Khalid Waheed, CEO of Ferozsons Laboratories Limited, about his company’s partnership for the production of remdesivir in Pakistan.
“I think it was 6 May 2020, when Gilead first reached out to us, and within a week, we had an agreement.
Within 12 weeks of that, we were able to start rolling out the product, and sharing information on production and quality control with our partners around the world,” said Waheed.
Under the looming shadow of the pandemic accord
Referring to the latest draft text of the pandemic accord, Thomas Cueni, IFPMA Director-General, said that he is concerned that, should IP protections for innovative drugs and vaccines be weakened, there is a risk that more “unlicensed, substandard, low quality and counterfeit” drugs and vaccines might be produced in the next pandemic.
The risk that new drugs and vaccines might enjoy weakened IP protections could also stymie investments in health tools that would be needed to confront the next pandemic, he warned.
“In terms of the pandemic treaty, I have to admit, I’m deeply concerned that the zero-draft is potentially undermining innovation,” Cueni said.
Member states of the World Health Organization (WHO) are currently in the process of negotiating a binding instrument for pandemic preparedness, prevention and response.
At the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body’s (INB) sessions this week in Geneva, African countries criticised the latest draft text, produced by a guiding body of six member states called the “Bureau”.
They called it “weak”, especially in matters concerning equity.
“The African member states recognise the hard position that the bureau finds itself in trying to keep everyone at the negotiating table…
“However, it is unfortunate that, in that process, the core of what this instrument is supposed to address, namely equity, has been presented in a weakened or reduced format, especially in those articles that would result in a meaningful realization of equity,” Ethiopia said, on behalf of the 47 countries in Africa.
Additional reporting by Kerry Cullinan.
Traveling has always come with complications, but the coronavirus pandemic has made it more challenging than ever.
Our By The Way Concierge column will take your travel dilemmas to the experts to help you navigate the new normal.
Want to see your question answered?
Submit it here.
Will the airlines reimburse me if I test positive for covid?
I don’t want to lose $700. —
Mike, Thailand
Travelers are usually offered a credit or voucher when coronavirus disruptions hit.
Lots of airlines promote that they’ve waived change fees or still offer flexibility on certain tickets.
But refunds don’t get the same billing on airline websites.
That makes sense.
Many customers will be fine getting a credit or voucher if it’s with an airline they will fly again someday, and airlines don’t want to lose your cash.
But they also don’t want people on their planes with the coronavirus.
(In fact, websites such as Southwest’s spell this out: If you have the coronavirus, please don’t fly.)
Does that mean they will give you a refund if you test positive near your travel day?
Most will at least consider it, but answers vary by airline.
[Why flying while sick could make you feel worse]
Delta
You’ll have to get in touch with reservations and explain your situation to get a refund.
According to a Delta spokesperson, there is no official rule or policy.
Agents work with customers on a case-by-case basis.
The spokesperson also mentioned that there are still no change fees (with the exception of basic economy fares) if you would like reschedule your trip.
Hawaiian Airlines
If you test positive, you can submit proof, such as a doctor’s note or a test result from a lab, through the airline’s website, hawaiianairlines.com, and someone from Hawaiian’s Consumer Affairs Office will grant refunds on a case-by-case basis.
It could take about a week to get a response to your claim, but the turnaround time depends on how many requests the office is dealing with at the time.
[Your guide to smoother holiday travel]
United
Coronavirus-positive customers can get a full refund if they submit a request to united.com/refunds with a positive test result showing the date, their name and the testing provider’s name, or a doctor’s note.
Southwest
Customers who test positive before their flight can contact Southwest’s customer relations team to appeal for a refund, even if their fare is nonrefundable.
If they can’t get a cash refund, Southwest customers can cancel their flight and get a credit to use for future flights.
American Airlines
American had a pre-pandemic policy that customers dealing with illnesses or health-related issues before their flight may be able to get a refund depending on the circumstance.
If you have the coronavirus and want a refund, contact the company’s reservations team to make your case.
[6 tips to avoid getting your family sick this holiday season]
The moral of the story is that even if an airline doesn’t make it clear on its website that you’re eligible for a refund, that doesn’t mean it’s impossible to get your money back.
If you get a positive result on a self- or at-home test, either contact your doctor to get an official note proving your illness or get a coronavirus test from a lab.
Send your official coronavirus documents through airline customer service to get the ball rolling on your request.
Next, call the airline’s reservations line to talk to an agent on the phone.
(We have tips for getting through faster here.)
Be nice.
Customer service agents are being worked to the bone, so a little respect may go a long way.
Still, be prepared to be firm about your request; you’d like a refund, not a credit or voucher.
If an agent denies your request, try again by calling back and asking the next representative.
Hopefully you’ll find some empathy on the other line.
Have a travel dilemma for By The Way Concierge?
Submit it here.
Study contexts and characteristics
Figure 1 summarises the data selection and screening process, according to the PRISMA guidelines7,8,9.
Of the total 39,816 records that were produced by searches, we identified 265 eligible studies for synthesis of their results in this review.
The list of included studies is available in Supplementary Tables 1, 2, the detailed distribution of studies across countries and vulnerable groups is in Supplementary Tables 3, 4, and additional details of the findings can be found in Supplementary Text A4.
Our data cover 49 countries spread across five continents (Fig. 2).
Fig.
1: Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews (PRISMA) flow diagram.
It summarises the data collection and screening processes.
We screened 39,816 records and synthesised 265 eligible studies in this review.
Full size image
Fig.
2: Distribution of included studies across countries and vulnerable groups.
a Global map.
b Data distribution around Europe.
c Data distribution around Asia.
Data listed in Supplementary Tables 5–7.
QGIS version 3.16.12 was used to generate the map (Open Source Geographic Information System, http://www.qgis.org).
Global map was downloaded from the OpenStreetMap © OpenStreetMap contributors.
Available under the Open Database Licence from: openstreetmap.org.
Full size image
The majority of studies in our dataset focus on children/students and low-income populations (96 studies and 58 studies, respectively).
This is followed by studies on the older people (n = 37), victims of domestic violence (n = 16), people with disabilities (n = 15), migrant workers (n = 14), refugees (n = 14), the people from sexual and gender minorities (n = 11), ethnic minorities (n = 10), sex workers (n = 9), and people in prison (n = 7).
There are five studies on vulnerable groups in general.
The classification we apply is not exclusive, and vulnerabilities can be intertwined, such as children with disabilities or children who are vulnerable to domestic violence.
Older people: vulnerability and physical distancing
Older people, especially those with chronic diseases, exhibit health vulnerability, including having a high risk of developing severe COVID-19 symptoms if they contract the disease.
They are also vulnerable to developing mental health problems, such as anxiety and depression, when isolated at home10,11,12,13,14,15.
Some older people are also prone to economic vulnerability, which may exacerbate their health vulnerability due to the resulting decreased access to essential living needs or medical services16.
In most countries, physical distancing measures have been neutrally applied to all populations, even though they may have negative impacts on the older people.
The review included 37 studies on older people.
In these studies, physical distancing measures are found to be effective in mitigating COVID-19 infection and deaths among the older people17,18.
However, at the same time they are found to further predispose older people to greater risks of cardiovascular, autoimmune and neurocognitive diseases14,19.
The literature also analyses alternatives policy measures to lockdowns, which are more cost-effective.
As an example, distributing hygiene kits is considered effective in preventing the spread of COVID-19 while mitigating unintended policy consequences, especially in low- and middle-income countries20.
To mitigate the risk of COVID-19 outbreaks within nursing homes and long-term care (LTC) facilities, early screening, detection and contact tracing are found to be effective21.
The distribution of tools for detection and remote monitoring of cases is also found to facilitate COVID-19 control in LTC facilities22,23.
To address mental health issues faced by older people when socially isolated, the use of technology is considered useful22,23,24,25.
Information and communication technologies are found to help the older people maintain social connections with their loved ones, including attending virtual recreational activities (e.g., playing games) to mitigate loneliness and maintain their wellbeing when they are isolated at home or in LTC facilities24.
Children/students: vulnerability and physical distancing
Children are subject to cognitive and communicative vulnerability because of their young age.
They are dependent persons (subject to economic vulnerability), relying on their parents/guardians to meet their living needs and receive financial support26,27.
Poor economic conditions, such as lack of access to schooling, health and social services, and inadequate clothing, contribute to children’s vulnerability27.
Among the 96 studies on children/students, most studies discuss school closing and remote learning.
Unintended detrimental impacts of school closures that are identified in the studies include negative impacts on educational outcomes (differing across learning courses) and on children’s physical health (e.g., weight gain)28,29.
School closures are found to cause widespread concerns about children’s suboptimal learning at home30.
Remote learning is found to exert pressure on teachers’ technical capacities to operate digital teaching, and often increases their working hours31,32.
Across the world, the implementation of remote learning has sparked concerns about the widening of learning gaps between students from different socio-economic classes.
Virtual learning environments cause inevitable disruptions.
Children from low-income families are affected more significantly by disruptions in learning and being deprived of the services and support that they receive in schools33,34,35,36,37.
They are likely to lack access to the internet and other digital resources, such as computers, and face issues such as a lack of regular meals and parental support, a home environment that is not conducive for learning, and a high risk of exposure to COVID-19 in crowded housing conditions33,34,36,38,39.
There have been debates on the extent to which school closures are effective in breaking the virus’s transmission, and the necessity of reopening schools to facilitate effective learning40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48.
As indicated by the literature, decisions on school closures or reopening should consider the severity of COVID-19 infections in the community and the ability of schools to enforce physical distancing, as well as to detect and trace suspected cases on campus/in school facilities43,45.
It has been shown that in many countries school reopening did not necessarily result in increases in COVID-19 transmission if health and safety protocols were adhered to.
These protocols include the following: teaching children hygiene measures (e.g., washing hands), mandating mask-wearing, ensuring one- to two-metre distancing, screening at entry, grouping students and reducing class sizes, limiting after-school activities, moving to outdoor classrooms, testing and tracing suspected cases, quarantining confirmed cases, suggesting that parents do not congregate outside the campus gates, staggering drop-off and pick-up times, enhancing air circulation, shortening school hours, offering options for in-person, remote or hybrid learning, and disinfecting facilities47,49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66.
To address children’s mental health issues, studies67,68 suggested that parents communicate constructively with their children about the current COVID-19 pandemic situation, in accordance with their maturity level and ability to understand the crisis, and in some parts of the world scholars have advocated for schools and families to assess and identify children’s mental health needs and issues69,70.
To enhance remote learning, especially to support vulnerable students from low-income families, solutions that have been applied have ranged from circulating printed materials to be used in learning from home32, putting out television broadcasts related to courses or other media71, identifying children’s needs and offering target instructions72,73,74, and offering support such as helping people obtain laptops, providing helplines, providing free-of-charge data SIM cards and implementing food programmes75,76.
Many governments have also established funds or fiscal stimulus packages to meet children’s educational needs during the COVID-19 pandemic35,73,74.
Low-income populations: vulnerability and physical distancing
As the term suggests, low-income populations face adverse financial conditions.
They may also face less favourable employment conditions, such as temporary contracts, part-time employment, self-employment and employment in the low-income informal sector.
Low-income levels also correlate with poor health77,78, poor housing conditions and even homelessness78.
As low-income populations typically have few savings, the loss of their job or income can further worsen their financial situation, causing other health risks, such as food insecurity79.
Fifty-eight studies across 19 countries find similar results regarding the challenges faced by low-income populations in adhering strictly to various physical distancing measures.
These include congregated living spaces, a dearth of sanitation facilities, an inability to work from home (e.g., if they work in the manufacturing and processing industries), a lack of access to job protection or paid leave, food shortages and food insecurity, worsened financial conditions and being forced to live off savings, a lack of regular access to basic hygiene, and a lack of resources and infrastructure for testing, isolation and contract tracing10,38,78,79,80,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99,100,101.
Lockdowns are reported to be less effective in containing and reducing new COVID-19 cases in low-income countries and communities97,102,103,104.
In addition, the social vulnerability of low-income populations intersects with economic vulnerability, and contributes to health vulnerability.
For instance, in slums and informal settlements, residents are exposed to poor living conditions, a dearth of sanitation facilities and a lack of clean drinking water; moreover, the high population density in slums renders one- or two-metre distancing impractical10,38,86,96,104,105,106.
These factors have negative repercussions for governments in terms of tracing, testing and treating COVID-19 infections.
Those with low incomes also face barriers to accessing healthcare due to income loss and reduced employer-sponsored healthcare83,101, while their access to government aid or relief packages is limited84,104,107,108.
The literature also records the mental distress suffered by low-income populations during the COVID-19 pandemic38,108,109,110.
According to the literature, to control the spread of COVID-19 among low-income communities, physical distancing measures should be context-specific90.
Intensive screening, testing, and contract tracing, and the isolation of infected cases, are found to be useful to keep cases low80,111,112.
Other measures, such as offering affordable masks, the availability of clean water, sanitiser and soaps, and easing crowding in low-income communities, are also necessary80,105,112.
Greater economic support has been called for to assist low-income populations35,87,93,96,99,113,114.
It is argued that access to unemployment insurance, paid medical leave and reemployment services should also be strengthened for those on low incomes79,87,115.
More effective channels for communication between low-income populations and governments can be established87.
Community-led efforts by non-governmental organisations are found to have been instrumental in aiding low-income populations during the pandemic.
Their efforts include offering food, distributing COVID-19 information and education through social media or SMS, facilitating contract tracing and quarantine, delivering groceries and other essential items to patients in quarantine, and establishing longitudinal clinical and social support for them through the involvement of community health workers and public health specialists106,116,117,118.
Migrant workers: vulnerability and physical distancing
A migrant worker is defined as “a person who is to be engaged, is engaged or has been engaged in a remunerated activity in a state of which he or she is not a national”119.
Migrant workers move away from their usual place of residence across an international border to a different country, or to a different place within the same country120.
Migrant workers are exposed to economic vulnerability due to experiencing adverse employment conditions, such as precarious recruitment processes, an absence of accurate information on the terms and conditions of employment contracts, and a lack of labour law coverage in the destination state/location121.
They may also face mental health vulnerability122, such as suffering from emotional distress due to social and cultural isolation, hardening migration policies and even the loss of accommodation in the destination state/location123,124,125,126.
Owing to lockdowns/stay-at-home orders implemented to control COVID-19, migrant workers (inter-state or inter-country) have faced a variety of challenges, including job losses and income loss127, food insecurity127,128, a high risk of exposure to the virus in crowded dormitories129,130, and limited access to primary healthcare and COVID-19 treatment107,130.
A study in the UK reported that the pandemic has led to a deterioration in the housing stability of the migrant worker population, making them even more socially and economically isolated, which has created ripple impacts, such as preventing them from accessing remote healthcare services126.
Migrant workers tend not to qualify for many COVID-19-related social benefits (e.g., food rations) provided by the destination country and are likely to be repatriated to their home countries131.
Migrant workers also suffer significant mental stress and loneliness due to financial instability, the isolation of migrant worker dormitories, language and cultural barriers, an inability to send remittances to families, and barriers to returning home to see their family members92,122,129,130.
These predicaments have resulted in some migrant workers adopting different survival strategies, such as reducing their expenses, consuming less food, and selling their jewellery, land and other possessions123.
A notable example of the drastic measures that have been taken to address COVID-19 transmission among migrant workers is Singapore.
The initial COVID-19 outbreaks in migrant workers’ dormitories in the country put Singapore in the global limelight and the government and non-profit organisations responded swiftly by enhancing migrant workers’ access to medical support and public health information129,132.
The government also employed extensive testing, established quarantine facilities, offered financial support for employers to pay migrant workers’ salaries, supported communication via facilitating internet connectivity and prepaid phone cards, and provided timely and free-of-charge medical care for infected migrant workers129.
In addition to governmental efforts, online information about COVID-19 in native languages that were accessible to migrant workers, as well as hotline- and web-based counselling services, were provided by a local non-profit organisation for migrant workers132.
People in prison: vulnerability and physical distancing
The primary vulnerability faced by people in prison is institutional or deferential vulnerability, as they are deprived of their liberty.
In addition, they are socially isolated and live in overcrowded spaces, which can lead to social vulnerability.
Vulnerability to mental health issues133 and violence134 are also typical among inmates.
The spatial density in prisons has been associated with outbreaks of infectious and communicable diseases135,136.
Enforcing social isolation or distancing in prisons has been shown to exacerbate inmates’ mental health issues and even suicide rates137.
Poor communication about the COVID-19 pandemic from prison staff contributes to increased stress and anxiety among people in prison138.
Prison escapes and riots have been reported in Brazil, Italy, Sudan and Nigeria due to increased social isolation measures imposed on people in prison, such as restrictions on receiving visitors80,137.
Some countries, such as Sweden139 and the UK138, have allowed virtual or video visits from families to mitigate the mental distress experienced by people in prison.
For instance, in Sweden, the Swedish Prison and Probation Service (SPPS) has provided inmates with tablets to enable phone calls or video calls with their children or their other family members and friends139.
Many prison units have also organised weekly information meetings to update inmates about the COVID-19 situation and the policy measures taken to preserve their safety in prisons139.
These measures have been found to be helpful in mitigating inmates’ fear of contracting the virus and preserving their mental health.
To reduce population density and reduce the spread of COVID-19 in prisons, some governments have released a number of people from prisons, primarily to home confinement or community supervision, such as in the US, Portugal, Iran, Ireland, Morocco, Libya, Burkina Faso, Uganda and Nigeria80,137,140,141.
Certain groups of people in prison have been considered for rapid release137, such as those who are approaching their actual release date, those eligible for medical release, those approved for community supervision, those held on minor charges, and those held pretrial on bail.
People with disabilities: vulnerability and physical distancing
A disability is defined as any physical or mental condition (impairment) that results in a limitation on a person’s activity (difficulty in undertaking certain activities, e.g., difficulty seeing, hearing, walking, or problem-solving) or a restriction on their participation (difficulty participating in normal daily activities, e.g., working, social activities, or accessing healthcare and preventive services)142.
People with disabilities typically face health vulnerabilities.
Economic vulnerability is also a prominent vulnerability reported among the people with disabilities as they often have less access to educational and employment opportunities, and are more likely to live in poverty or on a low income143,144.
When physical distancing measures are enforced, particularly during lockdowns, people with disabilities face challenges such as reduced social connections and reduced access to healthcare services145.
For instance, in-person supportive services, such as community-based rehabilitation, may be disrupted146, and people with mental disabilities (e.g., children with autism) may face worse mental health outcomes due to increased social isolation and suspension of therapy68,147.
The enforcement of physical distancing measures also inadvertently reduces access to medication, healthcare services and transportation for adults with mobility disabilities148.
In addition, their reduced mobility and social connections limits their access to social welfare services, such as food rations109.
In this review, one of the populations with disabilities found to be worst affected is children with disabilities.
When schools close during the pandemic, the lack of necessary technologies (e.g., braille readers) and services (e.g., help and support from special education teachers) at home may lead to their experiencing difficulties in participating in remote learning39.
Studies from Egypt and India have reported that remote learning poses challenges to the caregivers of children who are intellectually challenged, as these children’s attention span, impulsivity, mood swings and hyperactivity worsen post-lockdown, thus reducing their performance149,150,151,152.
By and large, it is found to be challenging to provide remote learning to students with disabilities because the services and the number of specialised instruction hours may differ for each student153.
The studies included in the review discuss solutions to help children with disabilities during the COVID-19 pandemic, such as allowing them to borrow learning devices from their school39, offering financial support to meet their educational needs154 and encouraging parents to help their children to understand the COVID-19 pandemic68.
Sex workers: vulnerability and physical distancing
By the nature of their occupation, sex workers face health vulnerability, due to their susceptibility to sexually transmitted infections, and social vulnerability, such as increased risk of being subjected to violence155.
Some also face economic vulnerability due to adverse financial conditions156.
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, sex workers living with HIV are reported to have experienced a lack of access to testing and treatment for sexually transmitted infections during lockdown periods157,158,159.
In addition, they also have limited access to COVID-19 social services and safety nets offered by governments160.
A study in Singapore also revealed that sex workers have experienced greater economic hardship during the pandemic as a result of a reduction in the demand for sex workers.
This phenomenon has also caused the out-migration of sex workers and a shift of sex work towards online spaces161.
To meet the basic needs of sex workers during the COVID-19 pandemic, community-based organisations have stepped up efforts to provide food, financial aid, COVID-19 safety guidance, and community-driven health interventions, including anti-retroviral therapy (ART)157,162.
In India, considering that ART was disrupted, the organisation Ashodaya Samithi formed a community-led system to distribute ART at private and discreet sites and utilised WhatsApp messaging to share information related to the pandemic158.
In Thailand, to secure the basic hygiene and personal protection needs of sex workers, community-led organisations, including the Raks Thai Foundation, Dannok Health and Development Community Volunteers, and SWING, provided food, hand sanitisers, condoms and face masks to the sex worker population157.
In Africa, community-led outreach has distributed food packs to sex workers during the pandemic163.
Victims of domestic violence: vulnerability and physical distancing
When isolated at home, victims of domestic violence are more socially isolated and have reduced access to institutional support164.
In many cases, having a disability can exacerbate a person’s vulnerability to domestic violence165,166.
Victims of domestic violence may face difficulties in leaving home to access institutional support during lockdowns.
In Spain, the Democratic Republic of Congo, South Africa, Guatemala, India, and Bangladesh, lockdown periods saw increased incidence of, and police reports of, domestic violence against women167,168,169,170,171,172.
Studies surmise that the official figures for such violence are under-reported as many formal and informal communication channels to access help for the victims, including transport to access shelters in some countries, either shut down or slowed down their operations during the pandemic, fostering change in help-seeking behaviour among abused women167,169,173.
School closures that force children to be homebound also put them at a higher risk of violence174.
A study in a city in Wales, in the UK, reported a significant increase in child protection medical examinations through self-referrals and third-party referrals in 2020 as compared to 2019175.
Remote counselling services through virtual platforms can be helpful for victims of domestic violence10.
In the UK, due to alarming trends in domestic violence during the pandemic, several national campaigns were organised to raise awareness of domestic abuse and to highlight available help services176.
Helpline services were extended for victims of domestic violence in the UK, and the government provided funds to support these helplines and other online support services from April 2020176.
Victims of domestic violence have sometimes been allowed to bypass lockdown restrictions to travel to sheltered accommodation to seek refuge176.
Schools and universities have also extended accommodation to students who are vulnerable to domestic violence and have ensured student counselling and support services are provided to support them176.
In France and Italy, governments also commissioned hotels as shelters for victims of domestic violence164.
Refugees: vulnerability and physical distancing
The vulnerabilities faced by refugees, as identified in the literature, include economic vulnerability177, social vulnerability (e.g., social isolation, living in crowded informal refugee camps, a lack of water and sanitation facilities, and vulnerability to violent attacks)178,179, and health vulnerability, particularly mental health problems180.
During the pandemic, precarious and overcrowding housing conditions have made it difficult for refugees to maintain physical distancing or self-isolation at home when required181.
Owing to the shutting of government services and decreased numbers of volunteers working in refugee camps during the pandemic, refugees have experienced limited access to food, basic sanitation and medical care181,182,183.
This situation exacerbates the mental health issues of refugees, who may already be living with post-traumatic stress disorders or other mental illnesses.
For some refugees, owing to the sensitive nature of their trauma histories, their forced isolation may bring to the surface traumatic memories of the past181,182,183.
Solutions, such as encouraging mask-wearing, limiting mobility, sectoring and setting up quarantine areas, as well as quickly detecting and isolating suspected or confirmed cases, have been implemented to limit the spread of COVID-19 in refugee camps80,184,185,186.
Mental health services have been provided for refugees through phone or video conferencing emotional therapies, as well as through other voluntary mental health services in a targeted attempt to reach out to refugee families182,187,188.
The active deployment of social workers to areas where asylum-seekers reside has also helped to address the social and psychological vulnerabilities they face during the pandemic189.
Ethnic minorities: vulnerability and physical distancing
Ethnic minority groups typically face social vulnerability as they are socially isolated/marginalised.
They tend to have less access to education and health services than the ethnic majority190.
Ethnic minorities also face economic vulnerability.
In any given country, members of an ethnic minority are more likely to live in poverty than the ethnic majority, on average, and are less likely to work in high- or semi-skilled jobs190.
Lockdowns may be particularly challenging for ethnic minority groups as they are less able to work from home or to self-isolate at home100.
People from an ethnic minority background are more likely to work in adverse employment conditions and to face greater financial concerns than the ethnic majority93,113.
Physical distancing measures are also found to substantially impact the mental health of ethnic minorities191.
Language barriers experienced by ethnic minorities are also highlighted as an issue.
These barriers can hamper their understanding of the pandemic and can hamper government efforts to enforce physical distancing measures192.
People from sexual and gender minorities: vulnerability and physical distancing
The people from sexual and gender minorities are socially isolated193 or vulnerable to violence;194
they also have health vulnerabilities, particularly vulnerability to HIV risks193,194 and mental health illnesses195.
The marginalised social identities of sexual and gender minorities reinforce and intersect with their health vulnerability.
This review finds that physical distancing measures to control COVID-19 may exacerbate the social and health vulnerabilities of the people from sexual and gender minorities195,196,197,198.
Most importantly, enforcing physical distancing may limit their access to essential medical services, including HIV testing and treatment196,197.
For those who are vulnerable to mental illnesses related to discrimination and lack of family acceptance, the enforcement of physical distancing measures directly cuts off their access to supportive friends and partners, reduces their sense of social connectedness and aggravates feelings of loneliness198.
For instance, a study in Brazil revealed that transgender populations reported substantial mental health problems and challenges in accessing healthcare during the pandemic199.
The stigma and social exclusion of the transgender population were exacerbated during the pandemic, especially those who were older, as their social and health needs were not properly addressed due to the small and dispersed nature of this population200.
Summary of results
Table 1 summarises the findings and specific examples mentioned in the literature (Supplementary Text A4.12).
This weekly COVID-19 news round-up brings you a selection of the latest news and updates on the coronavirus pandemic, as well as tips and tools to help you stay informed and protected.
Top COVID-19 stories: US CDC eyes reform post-pandemic; 'Brain fog' more likely after COVID-19 infection; Cases falling in the UK.
1.
How COVID-19 is affecting the globe
Confirmed cases of COVID-19 have passed 596.1 million globally, according to Johns Hopkins University.
The number of confirmed deaths has now passed 6.45 million.
More than 12.5 billion vaccination doses have been administered globally, according to Our World in Data.
Russia reported more than 30,000 new confirmed daily COVID-19 cases on 17 August – the first time figures have hit this level since mid-March.
The World Health Organization has recommended the use of French firm Valneva's COVID-19 vaccine.
North Korean leader Kim Jong Un has praised military medics for leading the country's response to a COVID-19 outbreak.
Canada's health ministry has authorized the use of Pfizer/BioNTech's COVID-19 vaccine as a booster for children aged 5 to 11.
The US Food and Drug Administration has asked Pfizer to test the effects of an additional course of its antiviral Paxlovid among people who experience a rebound in COVID-19 after treatment.
Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida has tested positive for COVID-19, forcing him to cancel a planned trip to Tunisia to attend a key conference on African development.
The number of people in the United Kingdom infected with COVID-19 is continuing to fall, Office for National Statistics figures show.
About 2.3 million people in the Philippines were pushed into poverty between 2018 and 2021, largely due to the economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the country's statistics agency says.
Daily new confirmed COVID-19 cases per million people in selected countries.
Image: Our World in Data
2.
US CDC to restructure and focus on public health response
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says it will prioritize its public health response in a restructure, following criticism of its handling of COVID-19 and the monkeypox outbreak.
An external report into the CDC's response says its public guidance caused confusion, while important information was sometimes released too late to inform federal decisions.
CDC Director Rochelle Walensky said that the agency is undertaking a series of changes designed to make it more nimble at responding, quicker at providing data and less focused on publishing fully vetted scientific papers.
"For 75 years, CDC and public health have been preparing for COVID-19, and in our big moment, our performance did not reliably meet expectations," Walensky told CDC staff.
Loading...
3. 'Brain fog' more likely after COVID-19
A new study from the University of Oxford has investigated neurological and psychiatric diagnoses in over 1.25 million people following a diagnosed COVID-19 infection.
It found that new diagnoses of disorders including psychosis, dementia, seizures and "brain fog" remain more common two years after COVID-19 compared with other respiratory infections.
However, the increased risks of depression and anxiety after COVID-19 are short-lived, the research published in The Lancet Psychiatry found.
"It is good news that the excess of depression and anxiety diagnoses after COVID-19 is short-lived, and that it is not observed in children," said Professor Paul Harrison who headed the study.
"However, it is worrying that some other disorders, such as dementia and seizures, continue to be more likely diagnosed after COVID-19, even two years later.
It also appears that Omicron, although less severe in the acute illness, is followed by comparable rates of these diagnoses."
The long-term effects of COVID-19 appear uncommon in children, but children who experience lingering effects may experience different symptoms compared to adults, according to a study in JAMA Pediatrics.
After reviewing the electronic health records of thousands of children who received a COVID test in 2020-2021, researchers found 9.1% of children had a positive test result.
Of these children, 41.9% had lingering COVID symptoms, also called the post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 (PASC).
Common PASC symptoms, assessed 1-6 months after COVID, included loss of taste or smell, heart inflammation, and cough and cold features.
In comparison, 38.2% of children who did not test positive for COVID had similar symptoms.
The differences between the two groups suggest a 3.7% prevalence of PASC among pediatric patients.
Children with PASC were more likely to be younger, have had a severe COVID case, and have underlying medical conditions.
Like adults, some children felt chest pain, tired, and had the chills.
However, they were less likely to have neurological symptoms, such as a headache, tingling pain, and brain fog or memory loss, which have been more common in adults.
Additional pediatric symptoms included hair loss, skin rashes, diarrhea, and respiratory symptoms.
The research was supported by NHLBI and the Researching COVID to Enhance Recovery (RECOVER) program.
To characterize the role of pre-pandemic geographic inequities and increased healthcare pressure brought about by epidemic waves of SARS-CoV-2 transmission, we took a systematic approach that involved longitudinal statistical analyses of hospitalized patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 infection in 14 state capitals of 27 Brazilian federal states, longitudinal analyses of healthcare resources in each city, mathematical modellng to disentangle the effect of geographic inequities and healthcare pressure from Gamma’s rapid expansion across Brazil and validation against external data.
The following sections summarize our methods.
All data used are publicly available, and no further ethics consent was required.
Code and data are fully available (see ‘Data availability’ section).
Data to characterize in-hospital fatality rates
We obtained publicly available individual records of patients with severe acute respiratory infection in public or private hospitals across Brazil that were reported in the SIVEP-Gripe database, release 31 January 2022 (https://opendatasus.saude.gov.br/dataset/srag-2020, https://opendatasus.saude.gov.br/dataset/srag-2021-e-2022).
Individual patient records in Brazil’s SIVEP-Gripe database do not contain linked SARS-CoV-2 sequence data.
To characterize the associations and effect sizes of geographic inequities and healthcare pressure on COVID-19 in-hospital fatality rates while controlling for variant-specific effects of Gamma on in-hospital severity, we focused analyses on geographically well-defined locations where SARS-CoV-2 sequence metadata were independently and freely available.
We searched GISAID (https://www.gisaid.org) on 14 June 2021 for sequence data associated with SARS-CoV-2 Gamma virus genome sequences in the 27 federal units (26 Brazilian states and the Federal District).
Gamma genome data were available for 16 federal units: Amapá, Amazonas, Bahia, Goiás, Maranhão, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Paraíba, Paraná, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do Norte, Rio Grande do Sul, Rondônia, Santa Catarina, São Paulo and Tocantins.
We focused our analysis on the state capitals in these federal units because key variables, such as population size, vaccination coverage and healthcare indicators, were more directly available at the level of state capitals.
We assumed that the frequency of Gamma in state capitals is similar to the frequency of Gamma across that state, measured by available sequence metadata.
Two state capitals, Palmas and Campo Grande, were excluded from further analysis due to limited, weekly age-specific COVID-19 hospital admission and death counts of residents reported to the SIVEP-Gripe database.
The cities in our sampling frame were, thus, Belo Horizonte, Curitiba, Florianópolis, Goiânia, João Pessoa, Macapá, Manaus, Natal, Porto Alegre, Porto Velho, Rio de Janeiro, Salvador, São Luís and São Paulo.
Reflecting the geographical expansion of COVID-19 through Brazil over time, our observation periods varied across cities.
The start dates were defined as the Monday after the date on which at least 2.5 patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 per 100,000 population were hospitalized in each location.
The end date was set to 26 July 2021 (Supplementary Table 1).
Records were filtered to exclude out-of-hospital deaths, defined as individuals with a missing hospital admission date or who died on the day of admission; to exclude confirmed infections with other respiratory pathogens or with missing diagnosis; to exclude non-residents to match city-level population denominators; and to exclude patients with at least one vaccine dose before hospital admission to that ensure that trends in fatality rates were not confounded with vaccine status.
To avoid bias16, our data, thus, included patients with PCR-confirmed, clinically diagnosed or suspected COVID-19 infection (Supplementary Fig. 17).
Alternative inclusion criteria were considered in sensitivity analyses and are reported below.
The data are available at inst/data/SIVEP_hospital_31-01-2022-all.rds in the GitHub repository.
Population size estimates in each city were retrieved by sex and 1-year age bands from the 2020 National Household Sample Survey COVID-19, Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios COVID-19 (ref. 52).
The projections were reconciled with available vaccination records of residents in each city, so that, at most, 99% of residents received at least one vaccine dose during the observation period (Supplementary Fig. 18).
The data are available at inst/data/PNADc_vaxadj_
population_210802.csv in the GitHub repository.
To further investigate the shocks in in-hospital fatality rates before and after Gamma’s emergence, we obtained monthly data on healthcare resources reported by healthcare facilities to the National Register of Health Facilities (CNES)53, release 15 September 2021.
Data on healthcare resources are mandatory to report by both public and private healthcare facilities and comprised personnel and equipment.
Nurses (CBO 2235), nurse assistants (CBO 3222), physiotherapists (CBO 2236), physicians (CBO 2231, 2251, 2252 and 2253) and intensive care physicians (CBO 225150) were summed per month and location according to the 2002 Brazilian Classification of Occupations (Classificação Brasileira de Ocupações (CBO)), and, where possible, records were validated by name and professional health card number.
ICU beds summed per month and location reported ICU type II, ICU type III and COVID type II beds.
ICU type I beds (code 74) refer to an older standard that is being phased out since 2017 and were not counted.
Type II ICU beds (code 75) represent the minimum requirement for severe cases of COVID-19 requiring ventilation.
Type III ICU beds (code 76) are, by regulation, reserved to ICU patients with multiple acute failures of vital organs, or to patients at risk of developing them, with an immediate threat to life54.
Since March 2020, new ICU beds were created to try to minimize the immediate risk of healthcare system collapse.
These ICU beds were intended exclusively for treatment of COVID-19 and are designated COVID-19 type II ICU beds (code 51).
At least one microprocessor-controlled lung ventilator must be available for every two ICU beds.
Considering that both a ventilator and an ICU bed are necessary for adequate treatment of severe COVID-19, we counted only adult ICU beds with a matched ventilator per month and location, defined as the minimum number of available ventilators (respirador or ventilador) and the number of adult ICU beds in the same healthcare facility that are reported to CNES, which we then aggregated across healthcare facilities in the same location29.
Critical care beds summed ICU beds and intermediate care beds (code 95), and we considered counts with and without controlling for available reported ventilators.
To guard against potential reporting differences or bias in reported bed types20, we also considered monthly counts of available ventilators as resource.
The number of reported ventilators (respirador or ventilador, code 64) does not include ventilators already held for ICU or critical care beds.
Thus, for each healthcare facility, we counted the number of lung ventilators reported to CNES and added one ventilator for every two reported ICU type II, type III or COVID-19 type II beds, added one ventilator for every three reported intermediate beds and then aggregated across healthcare facilities in the same location.
The data are available at inst/data/IPEA_ICUbeds_physicians_210928.csv in the GitHub repository.
Statistical analysis of in-hospital fatality rates
To characterize longitudinal trends to in-hospital fatality rates, we considered the age strata
$$\begin{array}{lll}{{{{{\mathcal{A}}}}}} &=& \left\{ {0{\mbox{--}}15, 16{\mbox{--}}29, 30{\mbox{--}}39, 40{\mbox{--}}49, 50{\mbox{--}}59, 60{\mbox{--}}69,}\right.\\&& \quad \left.
{70{\mbox{--}}74, 75{\mbox{--}}79, 80{\mbox{--}}84, 85{\mbox{--}}89, 90+ } \right\},\end{array}$$ (1)
to control for age dependence in fatality rates.
To capture temporal shocks in fatality rates, all data were aggregated to weeks.
In COVID-19-attributable patients with unreported outcomes, deaths were predicted independently in each location, week and age strata based on the fatality rates in COVID-19-attributable patients with observed outcomes in the two previous weeks, assuming data were missing at random over the 3 weeks \(w - 1,\,w - 2,w\) in each age group and each location.
Empirical fatality rates z l,a,w were defined as the ratio of underreporting-adjusted fatalities in unvaccinated, resident, COVID-19-attributable hospital admissions in location l, age strata a and week w except for weeks with no such hospital admissions.
Longitudinal trends \({\hat{z}}_{l,a,w}\) were obtained by fitting the non-parametric loess smoother as implemented in the R stats package version 4.0.3 with argument span = 0.3 to the empirical fatality rates z l,a,w , separately for each location and age band, and starting from the first week with non-zero hospital admissions in each age band.
To compare fatality rates across cities in a simple statistic while accounting for the substantial differences in age demographics (Supplementary Fig. 18), we calculated age-standardized, weekly in-hospital fatality rates with
$${\hat{z}}_{l,w} = \mathop {\sum }\limits_a \frac{{n_a^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}{{\mathop {\sum }
olimits_b n_b^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}{\hat{z}}_{l,a,w},$$ (2)
where \({\hat{z}}_{l,a,w}\) are the smoothed fatality rates in location l, age strata a and week w, and \(n_a^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}\) are our 2020 projected population sizes in age band a across the 14 cities (see above).
To avoid extrapolation, the smoothed rates (2) were generated onward from the first week for which the \({\hat{z}}_{l,a,w}\) were defined for all age groups.
We next defined 12 pandemic healthcare pressure indices that quantified hospital demand over time in each location.
Demand was defined in terms of all hospital admissions for severe acute respiratory infections (that is, including non-residents, cases caused by other pathogens and vaccinated individuals) and all ICU admissions among patients hospitalized for severe acute respiratory infection.
Records were again filtered to exclude out-of-hospital deaths as defined above.
The healthcare pressure indices were calculated by considering demand per available healthcare resource over time.
To account for the fact that admitted patients remain in care for several weeks, we considered rolling sums of the form
$$x_{l,w}^{{{{{3 {\mbox{-}} {{{\mathrm{wk}}}}}}}}\,{{{{{\mathrm{ICU}}}}}}\,{{{{{\mathrm{adm}}}}}}\,{{{{{\mathrm{per}}}}}}\,{{{{{\mathrm{ICU}}}}}}\,{{{{{\mathrm{bed}}}}}}} = \left( {\mathop {\sum }\limits_{i = 0}^3 h_{l,w + i}^{{{{{{\mathrm{ICU}}}}}}}} \right){\big /}r_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{ICU}}}}}}\,{{{{{\mathrm{beds}}}}}}},$$ (3)
where \(h_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{ICU}}}}}}}\) are the number of ICU admissions, and \(r_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{ICU}}}}}}\,{{{{{\mathrm{beds}}}}}}}\) are the number of ICU beds in location l and week w. Data on resources were available per month.
In weeks overlapping months, we used weighted averages of the resources in the corresponding months to define the weekly resources, and, otherwise, we used the monthly values.
Supplementary Table 5 provides definitions for all healthcare pressure indices considered.
Associations between the healthcare pressure indices and smoothed, age-standardized in-hospital fatality rates were quantified with Pearson correlation coefficients.
Data to account for Gamma’s expansion dynamics
To assess fluctuating in-hospital fatality rates in the context of the spatio-temporal expansion of the SARS-CoV-2 Gamma variant, we obtained from GISAID23 publicly available viral genome sequences across Brazilian states with collection date from 1 November 2020 to 31 March 2021 on 28 June 2021.
Acknowledgment tables with GISAID IDs are available in the acknowledgments_GISAID_Tables directory in the GitHub repository.
Records with incomplete collection dates were removed, de-duplicated and classified as Gamma or non-Gamma variants with pangolin version 3.0.6, Pangolearn version 1.2.12, scorpio lineage (https://github.com/cov-lineages/pangolin).
In total, we retained sequences and metadata from 7,221 samples, most of which were from São Paulo (1,104 viral genomes), with an average of 158 genomes per state.
Gamma and non-Gamma frequencies were calculated for each week and location, assuming that the frequency of Gamma in state capitals was similar to the state-level frequency of Gamma in the GISAID data.
The data are available at inst/data/genomic_data_210702.csv in the GitHub repository and shown in Supplementary Fig.
19.
Supplementary Table 1 reports the weeks in which Gamma was first detected in each location, and Extended Data Fig.
1 shows the proportion of Gamma sequences over time in each location.
Throughout, we denote the week index in which Gamma was in each location first detected by \(W_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{detect}}}}}} {\mbox{-}} \Gamma }\), the number of sequenced genotypes in location l and collection week w by s l,w and the number sequenced genotypes attributed to the Gamma variant with pangolin by \(s_{l,w}^\Gamma\).
Dating Gamma’s emergence
To guide our modeling, we dated the emergence of the SARS-CoV-2 Gamma variant in each location using viral phylogenetic methods based on a subset of 2,212 high-coverage SARS-CoV-2 Gamma genome sequences across the 14 locations under study.
This dataset included five sequences that had been recovered from the International Guarulhos Airport in São Paulo.
The reference strain WH04 (GISAID EPI_ISL_406801) was appended to the sequence dataset before multiple sequence alignment using MAFFT version 7 (ref. 55).
After removing untranscribed terminal regions, the resulting multiple sequence alignment had a length of 29,409 nucleotides.
Maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees were estimated using IQTree version 2 (ref. 56) under the Jukes Cantor (JC69) substitution model57.
We next used TempEst version 1.5.3 (ref. 58) to regress root-to-tip distances against sampling dates and identify data quality and data annotation problems before further phylogenetic analysis.
Specifically, we discarded virus genomes characterized by a genetic distance to WH04 of more than 4 standard deviations from the epi-week mean genetic distance to WH04 (ref. 59).
A total of ten sequences were excluded from subsequent phylogenetic analysis.
The GISAID identifiers of the excluded sequences were EPI_ISL_1821206, EPI_ISL_2249444, EPI_ISL_1821208 (earliest available sequence from São Paulo, dated 2020-11-03), EPI_ISL_1821217, EPI_ISL_2249440 (earliest available sequence from Rio de Janeiro, dated 2020-11-18), EPI_ISL_2249443, EPI_ISL_2241496 (earliest available sequence from Paraíba, dated 2020-10-01) and EPI_ISL_1715135, EPI_ISL_ 1821257 and EPI_ISL_2249437.
Estimating time trees for large alignments can be computationally intractable.
Thus, we follow a computation strategy similar to du Plessis et al.59 and Gutierrez et al.60 that involves (1) estimating an evolutionary rate using a subsample of the genome dataset of interest and (2) using a simpler computational approach to estimate time trees for the complete genome dataset.
For step (1), we randomly selected a maximum of 20 sequences per state (except for Paraíba and Rondônia, which had only 15 and nine sequences available, respectively, during the study period).
This generated a dataset of 264 genome sequences.
Sequences with earliest and latest dates of collection from each state were kept in the alignment to increase temporal signal of the resulting dataset.
We used BEAST version 1.10 (ref. 61) to estimate an evolutionary rate under a Hasegawa–Kishino–Yano62 substitution model and a strict molecular clock with a continuous-time Markov chain prior.
We used a Bayesian skygrid with ten grid points as a demographic tree prior63.
The BEAST.xml file is available at inst/utils/BEAST_thorney_P1.xml in the GitHub repository.
Four Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) chains were run for 50 million steps, sampling parameters and trees every 50,000 steps.
Convergence of the MCMC chains was assessed using Tracer version 1.7 (ref. 64).
For step (2), the complete dataset was analyzed using BEAST version 1.10.5 (ref. 65) using a newly developed approach that significantly reduces computation time.
This approach takes in a rooted phylogenetic maximum likelihood tree (instead of an alignment) and rescales its branches into time units.
The likelihood of each branch length is modeled as a Poisson distribution with a mean that is directly proportional to the clock rate66,67.
We used a rate of 4.864 ×
10−4 substitutions/site/year based on the median clock rate estimate obtained from step (1).
We defined a coalescent skygrid prior and used the best-fitting IQTree maximum likelihood tree rooted in TempEst as a starting data tree.
Two independent MCMC chains were run for 1,000 million MCMC steps and combined after discarding 10% of the run as burn-in to generate an empirical posterior tree distribution.
Convergence was assessed using Tracer version 1.7 (ref. 64).
We next used a 14-state asymmetric discrete Bayesian molecular clock phylogeographic approach68 implemented in BEAST version 1.10.4 (ref. 61) to infer ancestral state locations on an empirical distribution of 500 posterior time trees.
For sequences with known travel history, we assigned the state of infection instead of state of reporting.
We estimated unknown state locations for the sequences collected at the International Guarulhos Airport in São Paulo.
We tracked the complete jump history of viral movement events between each pair of states69,70,71.
We used a recently developed tool, the TreeMarkovJumpHistoryAnalyzer, which collects Markov jumps and their timings from a posterior tree distribution with Markov jump histories72, available at inst/utils/P.1_MJumps_complete_history.xml in the GitHub repository.
To date the most common recent ancestor of the earliest local transmission cluster in each state, we used a customised R script to summarize the posterior probability distribution densities for the earliest time of the introduction leading to two or more descendants in each of the 14 states.
The phylogenetically estimated dates of emergence of Gamma in each city are shown in Supplementary Table 1.
Throughout, we denote the week of the posterior median estimate with \(W_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{emerge}}}}}} {\mbox{-}} \Gamma }\).
Modeling to disentangle factors associated with shocks in in-hospital fatality rates
We developed a Bayesian multi-strain fatality model to disentangle the effects of pre-pandemic geographic inequities, pandemic healthcare pressures and Gamma’s in-hospital disease severity on fluctuating COVID-19 in-hospital fatality rates.
This section describes the modeling framework, and full details are given in the final section below.
Overall, the model is structured in three components.
In the first model component, a logistic function is fitted to the Gamma variant frequency data to estimate the proportion of Gamma infections in location l and week w, which, throughout, we denote by α l,w .
We here use the phylogenetically derived emergence times of the Gamma variant in each city and specify that α l,w is essentially zero for all weeks before \(W_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{emerge}}}}}} {\mbox{-}} \Gamma }\).
In the second model component, the proportion of hospitalized patients with Gamma and non-Gamma infections in the weekly hospital admissions are estimated by city, age and week of admission.
The model-based attribution of hospital admissions to Gamma and non-Gamma variants is based on the estimated expansion of the Gamma variant in each city through the α l,w .
In the third model component, we describe the fatality rates in the Gamma-attributable hospital admissions and non-Gamma-attributable hospital admissions through two corresponding regression equations.
The regression equations comprise non-parametric location effects, fixed effects associated with the healthcare pressure indices and non-parametric virus variant effects of Gamma-specific disease severity in hospitals.
The free parameters of the model, and, in particular, the parameters in the regression equations, can be well-identified from the weekly Gamma variant frequency data (denoted by \(s_{l,w}^\Gamma\)), the weekly COVID-19-attributable hospital admissions (denoted by \(h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\)) and the number of deaths occurring in the linked, individual-level records of weekly age-specific hospital admissions during follow-up (denoted by \(h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}} {\mbox{-}} {{{\mathrm{adj}}}} {\mbox{-}} {{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}}}}\))
(Extended Data Figs. 1 and 6–9).
Recall that the deaths count the observed deaths in patients with known outcome and the expected deaths in patients with unreported outcome, indexed by week w of hospital admission.
In the rest of this section, we provide more detail on the second and third component of the model.
In the second model component, the proportion of hospitalized patients with Gamma infection is estimated by city, age and week of admission.
To build intuition, we considered modeling the expected values of the hospital admissions \(h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\) with
$${\Bbb E}\left( {h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}} \right) = \left( {\alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a}^\Gamma
+ \left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a}^{{{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}} {\mbox{-}} }}}}\Gamma }} \right)h_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}},$$ (4)
where \(h_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\) is the sum of hospital admissions across age strata; \(\pi _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }\) is the characteristic age composition of non-Gamma hospital admissions in location l that is independent of time; and \(\pi _{l,a}^\Gamma\) is the characteristic age composition of Gamma hospital admissions.
It is clear that \(\pi _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}} {\mbox{-}} \Gamma }\) can be inferred from patient records when α l,w ≈ 0—that is, from before Gamma’s expansion—and \(\pi _{l,a}^\Gamma\) can be inferred from patient records when α l,w ≈ 1—that is, from after Gamma’s expansion.
Across time, the proportion of hospital admissions in age band a is described as a mixture of the Gamma and non-Gamma proportions that is determined by the increasing weights of Gamma’s variant frequency α l,w and the decreasing weights of the non-Gamma variant frequencies 1 − α l,w .
The model encodes robustness in the sense that good model fit can be obtained only when the observed age distributions of hospitalized patients shift over time according to Gamma’s expansion.
Following (4), in a particular age stratum a and week w, the expected number of hospital admissions attributable to Gamma is described by
$$\frac{{\alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a}^\Gamma }}{{\alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a}^\Gamma
+ \left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }}}h_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}.$$ (5)
Equations (4) and (5) are extended in the full model to account for the fact that the age distribution of hospitalized patients is also changing with higher cumulative mortality in older age groups and with prioritized vaccination of older age groups (see below).
In the third model component, we quantify and model the fatality rates in the Gamma-attributable hospital admissions (recall (5)) and non-Gamma-attributable hospital admissions (analogous to (5)) separately.
We model in-hospital fatality rates in week w, location l and age group a that are respectively infected with non-Gamma and Gamma variants with the decomposition
$$\zeta _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } = {{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}^{ - 1}\left( {\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } + X_{l,w}\beta _l} \right)$$ (6a)
$$\zeta _{l,a,w}^\Gamma = {{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}^{ - 1}\left( {\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } + \eta _{l,a}^{\Gamma {\mbox{-}}{{{{{\mathrm{random}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{effect}}}}}}} + X_{l,w}\beta _l} \right),$$ (6b)
where \(X_{l,w} \in {\Bbb R}^{1 \times p}\) are p standardized healthcare pressure indices in location l and week w and \(\beta _l \in {\Bbb R}^p\) are constrained to be non-negative.
For each location, we standardized the healthcare pressure indices to zero for the week in which the empirical fatality rates (2) are lowest before Gamma’s detection, which was typically at the beginning of the pandemic and observation period.
Specifically, we standardized each index according to
$${\tilde{x}}_{l,p,w} = \frac{{x_{l,p,w} - x_{l,p,{\tilde{w}}_l}}}{{{{{{{\mathrm{s.d.}}}}}}\left( {x_{l,p,w}} \right)}},$$ (7)
where \({\tilde{w}}_l = {{{{{\mathrm{argmin}}}}}}_{w = 1:\left( {W_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{detect}}}}}} {\mbox{-}} \Gamma } - 1} \right)} {\hat{z}}_{l,w}\) and s.d. denotes the standard deviation of the indicator across all weeks in location l, using the notation in (2) and (3).
The p regression coefficients β l were constrained to be positive so that each standardized index of increasing hospital demand pressure could only have an increasing effect on fatality rates when β l > 0, or no effect when β l = 0, and not offset each other and artifactually increase the effect of another index.
Thus, we can interpret the \({{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}^{ - 1}\left( {\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }} \right)\) as the lowest observed fatality rate in each location and age group (technically defined before the emergence of Gamma to guard against potential confounders in Belo Horizonte as described in the main text, and except for Belo Horizonte equivalent to over the entire study period) and take ratios of these terms across locations to quantify the effect of geographic inequities (location effect).
These ratios measure non-specific baseline differences in fatality rates across the state capitals that are not captured in our healthcare pressure indices.
Next, for each location, we can interpret the ratio of \({{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}^{ - 1}\left( {\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } + X_{l,w}\beta _l} \right)\) divided by \({{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}^{ - 1}\left( {\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }} \right)\) as the multiplier to in-hospital fatality rates in week w and age group a that is associated with the increasing healthcare pressure indices (healthcare pressure effect).
In (6b), \(\eta _{l,a}^{\Gamma {\mbox{-}}{{{{{\mathrm{random}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{effect}}}}}}}\) are non-parametric random effects that measure age-specific deviations in fatality rates in hospitalized patients attributed to Gamma infection.
So, for each location, we can interpret the ratio of \({{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}^{ - 1}\left( {\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } + \eta _{l,a}^{\Gamma {\mbox{-}}{{{{{\mathrm{random}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{effect}}}}}}}} \right)\) divided by \({{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}^{ - 1}\left( {\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }} \right)\) as the multiplier to fatality rates in hospitalized patients that is attributable to Gamma infection versus non-Gamma infection (variant effect in hospitals), controlling for differences in healthcare pressure in the weeks before and after the emergence of Gamma (because the X l,w β l are zeroed) as well as cumulative mortality and vaccination in the full model (see below).
We note that the regression model is measuring associations and is not guaranteed to identify causal relationships.
It follows again from (4) that, in a particular age group a and week w, the in-hospital fatality rate in Gamma and non-Gamma patients is described by
$$\begin{array}{l}\zeta _{l,a,w} = \frac{{\left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }}}{{\alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a}^\Gamma
+ \left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }}}\zeta _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } + \frac{{\alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a}^\Gamma }}{{\alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a}^\Gamma
+ \left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }}}\zeta _{l,a,w}^\Gamma .\end{array}$$ (8)
Equation (8) enables us to estimate, for each location, the unknowns in (6) from the longitudinal records of age-specific deaths in the denominator of hospitalized patients with COVID-19 in location l, age group a and week w and expanding variant frequency of Gamma in weekly SARS-CoV-2 sequence data.
Model validation and sensitivity analyses
Concerns on SARS-CoV-2 sequence sample representativeness73 prompted us to re-evaluate our findings using monthly state-level variant frequency data reported by Rede Genômica FioCruz (http://wwwgenomahcov.fiocruz.br/dashboard/).
Data on monthly Gamma variant frequencies in each Brazilian federal unit or state between November 2020 and May 2021 were retrieved from the dashboard on 15 June 2021.
We again assumed that the variant frequencies reported at state level are representative of the variant frequencies in state capitals.
We also considered weekly city-level Gamma variant frequency data from Manaus, Belo Horizonte and São Paulo obtained under controlled sampling frames.
In Manaus, samples from PCR-positive residents testing in two private laboratories through nasal and oropharyngeal swabs were selected at random regardless of cycle threshold values for sequencing.
The samples were sequenced and processed using the ARTIC bioinformatics pipeline74 as described in Faria et al.3.
Viral genomes recovered from 147 samples collected between 1 November 2020 and 10 January 2021 had sufficient genome coverage enabling lineage classification with pangolin version 2.2.1 (refs. 75,76).
In Belo Horizonte, samples were selected at random from PCR-positive residents in three laboratories (Laboratório Hermes Pardini, Laboratório de Biologia Integrativa, UFMG, and Laboratório Municipal de Referência, PBH).
The samples were sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform and processed using a custom pipeline.
Identified mutations were manually inspected, and the sequences were classified using pangolin version 2.2.1 (ref. 75).
In total, 27 samples were classified as Gamma and 47 samples to other lineages.
For São Paulo, sequences were generated by the Adolf Lutz Institute, a national public health and reference laboratory for São Paulo State, Brazil, retrieved from GISAID (https://www.gisaid.org) for the period 1 November 2020 to 31 March 2021.
In total, 76 sequences were analyzed between 1 November 2020 and 31 March 2021.
The data are shown in Supplementary Table 6.
We found only minor differences in our primary findings depending on what SARS-CoV-2 variant frequency data were used (Supplementary Figs. 9–14).
Given long-term underfunding of Brazil’s public healthcare system, we investigated if geographic inequities could be modulated by different proportions of patients in public and private hospitals and if the strong fluctuations in COVID-19 in-hospital fatality rates are also observed in private hospitals.
For São Paulo, we could classify most hospitals as either private or public.
We found consistently lower in-hospital fatality rates in private hospitals that, however, fluctuated in synchrony with those in public hospitals, in line with our primary findings (Supplementary Fig. 15).
In Belo Horizonte, the age-standardized COVID-19 in-hospital fatality rates declined over the summer months of 2021 to levels well below those seen during earlier time periods (Fig. 4a).
We hypothesized that larger numbers of patients hospitalized in Belo Horizonte may have been vaccinated, with no vaccination record reported to SIVEP-Gripe.
To address this possibility, we performed a sub-analysis in which we excluded patients with unreported vaccination status in the SIVEP-Gripe dataset (Supplementary Fig. 2).
In the figure, fatality rate estimates are not shown for weeks in which patient denominators were too small.
In this sub-analysis, we found larger discrepancies in fatality rates compared to the main analysis only for Belo Horizonte, suggesting that missing data on vaccination status have likely no substantial effect on our overall findings.
However, for Belo Horizonte, it is possible that our in-hospital fatality rate estimates are confounded with unreported vaccination status.
The highest age-standardized COVID-19 in-hospital fatality rates were observed in Rio de Janeiro, against the national trend of declining rates in Brazil’s South and Southeast macroregions.
It is possible that smaller proportions of hospitalized patients with unreported clinical outcomes may have died, and analyses were repeated assuming that all patients with unreported clinical outcomes survived.
We found, in comparison to other cities, that Rio de Janeiro’s baseline in-hospital fatality rates were, in this sensitivity analysis, considerably lower than in the main analysis but remained overall largest and showed the same strong fluctuations as in the main analysis (Supplementary Fig. 8).
In-hospital fatality rates also depend on which, and under what circumstances, severely ill patients are admitted to hospitals.
This prompted us to investigate if the observed fluctuations in COVID-19 fatality rates could, in part, be the result of concomitant changes in the profile of admitted patients.
There are limited data on disease severity at time of hospital admission available in SIVEP-Gripe; however, one indicator that can be readily calculated is the time between hospital admission and death in patients with a fatal outcome (Supplementary Fig. 16).
In Macapá, Manaus, Porto Alegre and Porto Velho, we found substantially shorter times to death when the number of COVID-19-attributable hospital admissions peaked, suggesting that admitted patients may already have been at a more severe clinical stage when admitted or that, during times of peak demand, healthcare pressure in hospitals both increased fatality rates and led to faster progression to death.
Further data on out-of-hospital deaths shows that COVID-19-attributable out-of-hospital deaths typically occurred during times of peak demand, with the exception of Rio de Janeiro (Extended Data Fig. 2).
Together, these data suggest that increased healthcare pressure likely acts to shape in-hospital fatality rates through distinct mechanisms, through a combination of both a reduced ability to provide adequate care and an increase in the average severity of admitted patients.
Full statistical model, generated quantities and counterfactuals
We begin by describing the three components of the full statistical model, which were already motivated and introduced above.
The first model component describes the temporal expansion of Gamma in hospital admissions through a logistic function and is given by
$$s_{l,w}^\Gamma \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Beta}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{Binomial}}}}}}\left( {s_{l,w},\frac{{\alpha _{l,w}}}{{\theta _1}},\frac{{1 - \alpha _{l,w}}}{{\theta _1}}} \right),$$ (9a)
$$\alpha _{l,w} = \frac{1}{{1 + {{{{{\mathrm{exp}}}}}}\left( { - \alpha _l^{{{{{{\mathrm{growth}}}}}}}\left( {w - \alpha _l^{{{{{{\mathrm{mid}}}}}}}} \right)} \right)}}$$ (9b)
$$\alpha _l^{{{{{{\mathrm{growth}}}}}}} \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Normal}}}}}}\left( {0,0.2^2} \right)$$ (9c)
$$\alpha _l^{{{{{{\mathrm{mid}}}}}}} \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Normal}}}}}}\left( {\alpha _l^{{{{{{\mathrm{mid}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{mean}}}}}}},3^2} \right)$$ (9d)
$$\alpha _{l,1:\left( {W_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{emerge}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } - 1} \right)} \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Normal}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{ccdf}}}}}}\left( {0,0.0025^2} \right)$$ (9e)
$$\theta _1 \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Exponential}}}}}}\left( {20} \right),$$ (9f)
where the Beta-Binomial is specified in terms of the shape–shape parameterization with mean s l,w α l,w and variance equal to the binomial variance component \(s_{l,w}\alpha _{l,w}\left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\) multiplied by \(\left( {1 + \left( {s_{l,w} - 1} \right)\frac{1}{{\theta _1^{ - 1} + 1}}} \right)\) to allow for overdispersion in the variant frequency data.
Time runs in units of weeks from the start of the first wave until the end of the observation period in each location.
The prior mean for the midpoint of the logistic function, \(\alpha _l^{{{{{{\mathrm{mid}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{mean}}}}}}}\), was set to the week in which the ratio \(s_{l,w}^\Gamma /s_{l,w}\) was closest to 0.5 in location l.
We force the variant frequencies of Gamma to close to zero before the week of Gamma’s emergence in each location, which is implemented through the informative prior (9e), where normal-ccdf denotes the survival function of a normal density.
The prior in (9f) peaks at zero and, thus, favors the least complex model with no overdispersion.
In the second model component, we couple (9b) to decompose the COVID-19-attributable hospital admissions \(h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\) by admissions with Gamma and non-Gamma variant.
We expand on equation (4) to account for demographic changes in the population at risk of severe infection, either through higher cumulative mortality in older ages or through prioritized vaccination of older ages, and denote the population that remains at risk of severe infection in location l, age group a and week w by \(n_{l,a,w}^R\).
Then, we assumed characteristic per-capita rates \(\lambda _{l,a}^\Gamma\), \(\lambda _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }\) of severe infection and hospitalization with Gamma and non-Gamma variants, respectively, and considered modeling the expected values of the hospital admissions \(h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\) with
$${\Bbb E}\left( {h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}} \right) = \left( {\alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a,w}^\Gamma + \left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }} \right)h_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}},$$ (10a)
$$\pi _{l,a,w}^\Gamma = \lambda _{l,a}^\Gamma n_{l,a,w}^R{\big /}\mathop {\sum }\limits_a \lambda _{l,a}^\Gamma n_{l,a,w}^R,$$ (10b)
$$\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } = \lambda _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }n_{l,a,w}^R{\big /}\mathop {\sum }\limits_a \lambda _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}} {\mbox{-}} \Gamma }n_{l,a,w}^R,$$ (10c)
and used \(\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }\), \(\pi _{l,a,w}^\Gamma\) in lieu of \(\pi _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }\), \(\pi _{l,a}^\Gamma\) in equations (4), (5) and (8).
We specified \(n_{l,a,w}^R\) as follows.
First, to account for cumulative mortality, we calculated excess deaths based on the all-cause deaths reported by Brazil’s Civil Registry (https://transparencia.registrocivil.org.br/registros) and subtracted from the population size projections the larger of cumulated excess deaths or all reported COVID-19 deaths in the SIVEP-Gripe database (Supplementary Fig. 6).
Second, to account for increasing vaccine protection, we calculated vaccination coverage by vaccine administered in each location, age group and week (Supplementary Figs.
3–5), based on vaccine administration records from the Brazilian Ministry of Health (https://opendatasus.saude.gov.br/dataset/covid-19-vacinacao).
We then calculated the population at risk of severe infection, \(n_{l,a,w}^R\), by subtracting further a proportion of the individuals vaccinated with one or two doses for at least 2 weeks according to the vaccine-specific efficacy values77,78,79,80,81 listed in Supplementary Table 7.
Following the mean structure of (10), the second model component is given by
$${{{{{\bf{h}}}}}}_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}} \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Dirichlet}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{Multinomial}}}}}}\left( {h_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{sum}}}}}}},{\bf \phi} _{l,w}{{{{{\bf{\uppi }}}}}}_{l,w}} \right)$$ (11a)
$$\pi _{l,a,w} = \alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a,
w}^\Gamma + \left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }$$ (11b)
$$\pi _{l,a,w}^\Gamma = {{{{{\mathrm{softmax}}}}}}\left( {{{{{{\mathrm{log}}}}}}\,\lambda _{l,a}^\Gamma + {{{{{\mathrm{log}}}}}}\,n_{l,a,w}^R} \right)$$ (11c)
$$\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } = {{{{{\mathrm{softmax}}}}}}\left( {{{{{{\mathrm{log}}}}}}\, \lambda _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } + {{{{{\mathrm{log}}}}}}\, n_{l,a,w}^R} \right)$$ (11d)
$${{{{{\mathrm{log}}}}}}\,\lambda _{l,a}^\Gamma \sim {{{{{\mathrm{N}}}}}}\left( {0,1} \right)$$ (11e)
$${{{{{\mathrm{log}}}}}}\,\lambda _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } \sim {{{{{\mathrm{N}}}}}}\left( {0,1} \right)$$ (11f)
$$\phi _{l,w} = \left( {h_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{sum}}}}}}} - 1} \right)/\left( {\theta _2 + 1} \right)$$ (11g)
$$\theta _2 \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Exponential}}}}}}\left( {20} \right),$$ (11h)
where we denote the vector of age-specific hospital admissions in location l and week w by \({{{{{\mathbf{h}}}}}}_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}} = \left( {h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}} \right)_{a
\in {{{{{\mathcal{A}}}}}}}\) and the vector of the age composition of hospital admissions in location l and week w by \({{{{{\mathbf{\pi }}}}}}_{l,w} = \left( {\pi _{l,a,w}} \right)_{a
\in {{{{{\mathcal{A}}}}}}}\) again such that \(\mathop {\sum }\limits_a \pi _{l,a,w} = 1\).
The Dirichlet-Multinomial is in standard sample size-scale parameterization such that the means are given by \(h_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{sum}}}}}}}\pi _{l,a,w}\) as in (9b).
The softmax transformations (11c) and (11d) allow for convenient prior specifications of the log hospital admission rates on the real line and run over age bands a for fixed location l and fixed week w.
The scale parameter ϕ l,w is conditional on the known \(h_{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{sum}}}}}}}\) re-parameterized into the overdispersion parameter θ 2 , with θ 2 >0, and the prior on θ 2 in (11h) peaks at zero and favors the least complex model with no overdispersion.
In the third model component, we describe the expected fatality rates in the COVID-19-attributable hospital admissions according to the modeled Gamma and non-Gamma fatality rates (6) and their corresponding contributions to the overall fatality rates according to Gamma’s increasing frequency (8), which is given by
$$h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{adj}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}} \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Beta}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{Binomial}}}}}}\left( {h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}},\zeta _{l,a,w}/\theta _3,\left( {1 - \zeta _{l,a,w}} \right)/\theta _3} \right)$$ (12a)
$$\zeta _{l,a,w} = \frac{{\left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }}}{{\alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a,w}^\Gamma + \left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }}}\zeta _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } + \frac{{\alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a,w}^\Gamma }}{{\alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a,w}^\Gamma + \left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }}}\zeta _{l,a,w}^\Gamma$$ (12b)
$${{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}\,\zeta _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } = \eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } + X_{l,w}\beta _l$$
(12c)
$${{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}\,\zeta _{l,a,w}^\Gamma = \eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }
+ \eta _{l,a}^{\Gamma {\mbox{-}}{{{{{\mathrm{random}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{effect}}}}}}} + X_{l,w}\beta _l$$ (12d)
$$\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Normal}}}}}}\left( { - 0.25,1.5^2} \right)$$ (12e)
$$\eta _{l,a}^{\Gamma {\mbox{-}}{{{{{\mathrm{random}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{effect}}}}}}} \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Normal}}}}}}\left( {0,\sigma _\zeta ^2} \right)$$ (12f)
$$\beta _{l,i} \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Normal}}}}}}_{\left[ {0,\infty } \right]}\left( {0,\kappa _{l,i}^2\tau ^2} \right)$$ (12g)
$$\kappa _{l,i} \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Half}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{Cauchy}}}}}}\left( {0,1} \right)$$ (12h)
$$\tau \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Half}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{Cauchy}}}}}}\left( {0,0.01} \right)$$ (12i)
$$\sigma _
\zeta \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Exponential}}}}}}\left( 2 \right)$$ (12j)
$$\theta _3 \sim {{{{{\mathrm{Exponential}}}}}}\left( {100} \right),$$ (12k)
where w = 1, …, W l .
Importantly, we note that the deaths \(h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{adj}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}}\) in (12a) are derived from the individual-level line list of hospital admissions in week w, adjusted only for underreporting, and so \(h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{adj}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}}\) counts the deaths in exactly the \(h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\) individual patients who were admitted in week w.
The Beta-Binomial is in the shape–shape parameterization with mean \(h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\zeta _{l,a,w}\) and variance equal to the binomial variance component \(h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\zeta _{l,a,w}\left( {1 - \zeta _{l,a,w}} \right)\) multiplied by \(\left( {1 + \left( {h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}} - 1} \right)\frac{1}{{\theta _
3^{ - 1} + 1}}} \right)\) to allow for overdispersion.
The priors in (12e) were chosen to place the non-Gamma in-hospital fatality rate around the empirically observed range.
In (12f), we model the Gamma in-hospital fatality rate as a random effect around the non-Gamma in-hospital fatality rate.
In the model, we conservatively sought to favor no dependence of in-hospital fatality rates on the hospital pressure indices, which we implemented using the horseshoe-type shrinkage prior in (12g–12i).
The prior in (12k) peaks at zero and favors the least complex model with no overdispersion.
The model described through equations (9)–(12) was implemented in the Stan probabilistic computing language, is available at inst/stan-models/age_hfr_210719d.stan in the GitHub repository and was independently fitted to data from each location using cmdstanr version 0.3.0.9 (refs. 82,83).
Because inferences were performed separately for each location, the estimates from each location provide independent support into the inferred relationships among in-hospital fatality rates, healthcare inequities and healthcare pressure.
Each inference was conducted in four Hamiltonian Monte Carlo chains, each over 500 warmup iterations, and 50,500 sampling iterations.
The smallest bulk effective sample size was 1,687.
From the Monte Carlo samples of the joint posterior distribution of the fitted Bayesian multi-strain fatality model, we generate the following quantities.
We calculate the expected, COVID-19-attributable hospital admissions among residents in location l, age band a and week w for non-Gamma and Gamma variants that had no evidence of vaccination before hospitalization, respectively, by
$$h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{non }}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } = \left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}$$ (13a)
$$h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } = \alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a,w}^\Gamma h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}},$$ (13b)
where \(h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\) are observed and α l,w , \(\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }\), \(\pi _{l,a,w}^\Gamma\) are from the joint posterior.
The expected, COVID-19-attributable hospital admissions among residents in location l, age band a and week w across all variants are
$$h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{all}}}}}}} = h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } + h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }.$$
(14)
We, thus, have that the expected share of age group a among hospital admissions among residents of location l in week w with non-Gamma variants is \(\frac{{h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }}}{{\mathop {\sum }
olimits_b h_{l,b,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }}} = \pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }\) and similarly for Gamma.
The expected share of age group a among hospital admissions among residents of location l in week w across all variants is \(\pi _{l,a,w} = \left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } + \alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a,w}^\Gamma\).
We calculate the expected, COVID-19-attributable deaths among hospital admissions in residents in location l, age band a and week w for non-Gamma and Gamma variants, respectively, by
$$h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma {\mbox{-}}{{{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}} = \left( {1 - \alpha _{l,w}} \right)\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\zeta _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }$$ (15a)
$$h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma {\mbox{-}}{{{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}} = \alpha _{l,w}\pi _{l,a,w}^\Gamma h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\zeta _{l,a,w}^\Gamma ,$$ (15b)
where \(h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\) are observed and \(\alpha _{l,w}\), \(\pi _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }\), \(\pi _{l,a,w}^\Gamma\), \(\zeta _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }\), \(\zeta _{l,a,w}^\Gamma\) are from the joint posterior.
The expected, COVID-19-attributable deaths among hospital admissions in residents in location l, age band a and week w for all variants are
$$h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{all}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}} = h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma {{\mbox{-}}{{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}} + h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma {\mbox{-}}{{{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}}.$$ (16)
To compare COVID-19 in-hospital fatality rates across locations, we define the overall in-hospital fatality rate in location l and week w in an age-standardized population that adjusts for differences in age composition across locations.
Specifically, we calculate
$$\zeta _{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{age}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{std}}}}}}} = \mathop {\sum }\limits_a \frac{{n_a^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}{{\mathop {\sum }
olimits_b n_b^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}\zeta _{l,a,w},$$ (17)
where \(n_a^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}\) is the population size in age band a across all cities considered, and \(\zeta _{l,a,w}\) is from the joint posterior.
Then, for each location, we define the week w* with lowest in-hospital fatality rate as the week that minimizes the posterior median of (17),
$$w_l^ \star = {{{{{\mathrm{argmin}}}}}}_{w \in 1:W_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{detect}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }}\left( {{{{{{\mathrm{posterior}}}}}}\,{{{{{\mathrm{median}}}}}}\,{{{{{\mathrm{of}}}}}}\,\zeta _{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{age}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{std}}}}}}}} \right),$$ (18)
and calculate the lowest, age-standardized COVID-19 in-hospital fatality rates before the first detection of Gamma through
$$\zeta _l^{{{{{{\mathrm{lowest}}}}}}} = \zeta _{l,w_l^ \star }^{{{{{{\mathrm{age}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{std}}}}}}}.$$ (19)
We recall that the healthcare pressure indices are standardized and evaluate to zero in the reference week of each location—that is, the week before the first detection of Gamma with lowest empirical, age-standardized in-hospital fatality rate.
The week \(w_l^ \star\) typically corresponds to the week with lowest empirical, age-standardized in-hospital fatality rate, and so \(\zeta _l^{{{{{{\mathrm{lowest}}}}}}}\) is evaluated when the healthcare pressure effect \(X_{l,w}\beta _l\) is zero.
The estimated Gamma frequencies α l,w are, of course, also very small before the first detection of Gamma, and so the lowest, age-standardized COVID-19 in-hospital fatality rate are to good approximation given by
$$\zeta _l^{{{{{{\mathrm{lowest}}}}}}} \approx \mathop {\sum }\limits_a \frac{{n_a^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}{{\mathop {\sum }
olimits_b n_b^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}{{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}^{ - 1}\left( {\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }} \right),$$ (20)
where \(\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }\) are the intercept terms in our regression (6) and from the joint posterior.
Then, to compare (19) across locations, we find the location with overall lowest age-standardised in-hospital fatality rate by
$$l^ \star = {{{{{\mathrm{argmin}}}}}}_l\,\zeta _l^{{{{{{\mathrm{lowest}}}}}}},$$ (21)
and compute for all other locations l the ratio
$$\zeta _l^{{{{{{\mathrm{lowest}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{ratio}}}}}}} = \zeta _l^{{{{{{\mathrm{lowest}}}}}}}\big/\zeta _{l^ \star }^{{{{{{\mathrm{lowest}}}}}}}.$$ (22)
We interpret (22) as the location effect on COVID-19 in-hospital fatality rates.
Because of (20), the location effect does not include contributions attributable to the healthcare pressure indices (\(X_{l,w}\beta _l\)) nor any contributions attributable to the non-parametric Gamma effects (\(\eta _{l,a}^\Gamma\)) on in-hospital fatality rates.
To compare time trends to in-hospital fatality rates in each location, we calculate for each location the multiplicative effect of changes in healthcare demand and resources in week w in location l by
$$\zeta _{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{multiplier}}}}}}} = \mathop {\sum }\limits_a \frac{{n_a^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}{{\mathop {\sum }
olimits_b n_b^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}\left( {\zeta _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } \big/\zeta _{l,a,w_l^ \star }^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }} \right),$$ (23)
where \(\zeta _{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }\) are from the joint posterior.
Recalling equation (6a), we have
$$\zeta _{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{multiplier}}}}}}} \approx \mathop {\sum }\limits_a \frac{{n_a^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}{{\mathop {\sum }
olimits_b n_b^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}\frac{{{{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}^{ - 1}\left( {\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } + X_{l,w}\beta _l} \right)}}{{{{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}^{ - 1}\left( {\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }} \right)}}.$$ (24)
Here, the approximation is because the Gamma frequencies α l,w are very small but not exactly zero and because the week in which the loess-smoothed fatality rates are lowest may not exactly coincide with the week \(w_l^ \star\) in which the model-based fatality rates are lowest.
We interpret (23) as the healthcare pressure effect on COVID-19 in-hospital fatality rates.
Because of (24), the healthcare pressure effect does not include contributions attributable to the non-parametric Gamma effects (\(\eta _{l,a}^\Gamma\)) on in-hospital fatality rates and corresponds to the multiplier to the minimum fatality rates in each location that is associated with the healthcare pressure indices (\(X_{l,w}\beta _l\)).
Finally, we describe the effect of Gamma on in-hospital fatality rates in the model.
Standardizing across age bands, we calculate the ratio in Gamma versus non-Gamma in-hospital fatality rates in location l by
$$\zeta _l^{\Gamma - {{{{{\mathrm{ratio}}}}}}} = \mathop {\sum }\limits_a \frac{{n_a^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}{{\mathop {\sum }
olimits_b n_b^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}\zeta _{l,a,w_l^ \star }^\Gamma /\zeta _{l,a,w_l^ \star }^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma },$$ (25)
where \(\zeta _{l,a,w_l^ \star }^\Gamma\), \(\zeta _{l,a,w_l^ \star }^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }\) are from the joint posterior.
We interpret (25) as the Gamma effect on in-hospital fatality rates.
It is again helpful to recall equation (6), which shows that we can approximate the Gamma effect through
$$\zeta _l^{\Gamma - {{{{{\mathrm{ratio}}}}}}} \approx \mathop {\sum }\limits_a \frac{{n_a^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}{{\mathop {\sum }
olimits_b n_b^{{{{{{\mathrm{cities}}}}}}}}}\frac{{{{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}^{ - 1}\left( {\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma } + \eta _{l,a}^\Gamma } \right)}}{{{{{{{\mathrm{logit}}}}}}^{ - 1}\left( {\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }} \right)}}.$$ (26)
The ratio \(\zeta _l^{\Gamma - {{{{{\mathrm{ratio}}}}}}}\) does not include contributions attributable to the healthcare pressure indices (\(X_{l,w}\beta _l\)) and corresponds to the multiplier to the minimum fatality rates in each location that is associated with the non-parametric Gamma effects (\(\eta _{l,a}^{{{{{{\mathrm{non}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }\)).
To quantify the effect that the observed fluctuations in COVID-19-attributable in-hospital rates had on the death toll in the 14 state capitals, we performed two counterfactual analyses.
The aim of the first counterfactual (Scenario 1) was to estimate how many COVID-19-attributable deaths could have been avoided with sufficient healthcare resources so that healthcare pressures would not have resulted in shocks in in-hospital fatality rates in each city.
We implemented Scenario 1 by predicting deaths in each city under the minimum in-hospital fatality rate that was observed in each age group in that city.
Specifically, for each location l, we considered the estimated age-specific in-hospital fatality rates (8) in the week (18) and computed
$$h_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{hyp1}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}} = \mathop {\sum }\limits_{w = 1}^{W_l} \mathop {\sum }\limits_{a \in {{{{{\mathcal{A}}}}}}} h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\zeta _{l,a,w_l^ \star },$$ (27)
where the week indices range over the entire observation period.
We define the expected COVID-19-attributable deaths that could have been avoided in the absence of healthcare pressures in location l during the observation period relative to this hypothetical scenario by
$$h_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{hyp1}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{avoidable}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}} = \left( {\mathop {\sum }\limits_{w = 1}^{W_l} \mathop {\sum }\limits_{a \in {{{{{\mathcal{A}}}}}}} h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{adj}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}}} \right) - h_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{hyp1}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}}.$$ (28)
Similarly, we define the expected percentage reduction in COVID-19-attributable deaths relative to this hypothetical scenario by
$$p_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{hyp1}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{avoidable}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}} = 1 - \frac{{h_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{hyp1}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}}}}{{\mathop {\sum }
olimits_{w = 1}^{W_l} \mathop {\sum }
olimits_{a \in {{{{{\mathcal{A}}}}}}} h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{adj}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}}}}.$$ (29)
The aim of the second counterfactual (Scenario 2) was to estimate how many COVID-19-attributable deaths could have been avoided with sufficient healthcare resources and without healthcare inequities across the cities.
We implemented Scenario 2 by predicting deaths in each city under the minimum in-hospital fatality rate seen across all cities, which we observed in Belo Horizonte.
Specifically, we considered the location \(l^{ \star \star }\) in which we found the lowest age-standardized in-hospital fatality rate before Gamma’s detection in each location
$$l^{ \star \star } = {{{{{\mathrm{argmin}}}}}}_l\left( {\mathop {{{{{{{\mathrm{min}}}}}}}}\limits_{w \in 1:W_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{detect}}}}}}{\mbox{-}}\Gamma }} \left( {{{{{{\mathrm{posterior}}}}}}\,{{{{{\mathrm{median}}}}}}\,{{{{{\mathrm{of}}}}}}\,\xi _{l,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{age}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{std}}}}}}}} \right)} \right)$$ (30)
and computed
$$h_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{hyp2}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}} = \mathop {\sum }\limits_{w = 1}^{W_l} \mathop {\sum }\limits_{a \in {{{{{\mathcal{A}}}}}}} h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}}}}\zeta _{l^{ \star \star },a,w^ \star },$$ (31)
where, again, the week indices range over the entire observation period.
In analogy to the first counterfactual, we then calculate
$$h_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{hyp2}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{avoidable}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}} = \left( {\mathop {\sum }\limits_{w = 1}^{W_l} \mathop {\sum }\limits_{a \in {{{{{\mathcal{A}}}}}}} h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{adj}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}}} \right) - h_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{hyp2}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}},$$ (32)
and then the expected percentage reduction
$$p_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{hyp2}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{avoidable}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}} = 1 - \frac{{h_l^{{{{{{\mathrm{hyp2}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}}}}{{\mathop {\sum }
olimits_{w = 1}^{W_l} \mathop {\sum }
olimits_{a \in {{{{{\mathcal{A}}}}}}} h_{l,a,w}^{{{{{{\mathrm{res}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{adj}}}}{\mbox{-}}{{{\mathrm{D}}}}}}}}}.$$ (33)
Reporting Summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
UCI biologists Kim Green and Tom Lane have been awarded $250,000 from the Alzheimer’s Association to assess how COVID-19 affects the onset and severity of Alzheimer’s disease.
Decades of research indicate that viral or bacterial infections may contribute to the onset of the Alzheimer’s and worsen its pathological changes in the brain, suggesting that infection-mediated inflammation may increase the susceptibility of developing AD later in life.
This is further highlighted in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic, as SARS2 infection is associated with a worsening of clinical symptoms in elderly patients with dementia.
In their study, Green and Lane will infect novel transgenic mice with SARS-CoV2 and determine how the virus influences the development and underlying mechanisms of AD pathologies.
With the information they discover, the researchers hope to better understand how immune responses triggered by SARS-CoV-2 infection affect the central nervous system and to identify potentially novel therapies that limit AD pathology.
Consumers and health care providers should not use certain SD Biosensor Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Tests distributed by Roche Diagnostics due to bacterial contamination, but throw them in the trash, the Food and Drug Administration announced last week.
Health care providers should consider retesting patients using the test less than two weeks ago if they suspect an inaccurate result; consider whether patients presenting with signs of bacterial infection recently used the test; and report any problems experienced with the tests to the MedWatch program, FDA said.
SciCheck Digest
As the virus that causes COVID-19 has evolved, the vaccines have become less effective in preventing symptomatic infection while remaining highly effective in preventing severe disease and death.
This shift has been misrepresented by anti-vaccine influencers who falsely claim that it means the vaccines don’t work and have been ineffective all along.
How effective are the COVID-19 vaccines?
Full Story
Viruses mutate, or change, as they replicate.
That’s largely why the currently available vaccine formulas aren’t working as well at preventing infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.
Those vaccines — made by Moderna, Pfizer/BioNTech and Johnson & Johnson — were highly effective in preventing both symptomatic infection and serious illness against early strains of the virus.
But they are less effective against infection from the currently circulating subvariants of the omicron variant.
Public health officials have acknowledged this shift and changed their advice accordingly, in an effort to deal with a disease that became the third-leading cause of death in the U.S. in 2020 and 2021 and has killed more than a million people across the country.
But anti-vaccine campaigners and those who have cast doubt on the severity of COVID-19 have twisted those remarks to suggest that the health care establishment had given faulty advice about the value of the vaccines from the beginning.
For example, conservative influencer David Harris Jr. — who has 1.5 million followers on Instagram — posted a pair of video clips featuring Brett Sutton, the chief health officer for the Australian state of Victoria.
One clip is from April, showing Sutton encouraging people to get a booster shot, saying that it can help keep people from “getting infected in the first place.”
The other clip shows part of a press conference from August, as Victoria was experiencing a surge in cases, where Sutton said: “Despite two, three, four doses of the vaccine, it’s not so good at preventing infection in the first place.”
Harris didn’t include the dates of the clips — he labeled them only “Then” and “Now.”
In the caption, he referred to his earlier claim that the COVID-19 vaccine “doesn’t work,” writing: “I wonder which of my other conspiracy theories will be proven true next???”
Similar claims have been ubiquitous on social media and beyond.
They’ve been posted on platforms such as the right-wing website Gateway Pundit, which claimed in a headline that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention “finally admits their vaccines do not prevent anyone from getting or spreading the virus.”
And they’ve shown up on a San Diego television station that has a history of promoting dubious claims about COVID-19.
The station featured a guest who claimed the CDC had said of the vaccines, “turns out they don’t really work anyway,” and that CDC officials “knew they weren’t really going to do what we said they would.”
That guest was Dr. Kelly Victory, who holds an active medical license in both Colorado and Ohio, but according to her LinkedIn profile has spent the last 16 years as a consultant for disaster preparedness training.
She also campaigned against the Affordable Care Act in 2012.
Victory has advocated against most public health advice over the course of the pandemic, claiming that “masks don’t work” and that asymptomatic spread “simply doesn’t occur with respiratory viruses.”
In one talk radio appearance in 2021, Victory said that she had been “censored” for making those claims.
But her claims just aren’t true.
Other related claims have been pervasive online, such as the meme shared by Donald Trump Jr. suggesting that recently updated guidance from the CDC matches what those who have downplayed the severity of the pandemic and questioned the value of the vaccines had been saying all along.
But the new guidance doesn’t indicate that health care experts were wrong about the vaccines or any other mitigation measures they had recommended.
Highly Effective Against Initial Outbreak
“The truth is, the effectiveness of vaccines shifted with each of the new variants,” Dr. Peter Hotez, Co-Director of the Center for Vaccine Development at Texas Children’s Hospital and Dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine, told us in a phone interview.
When the vaccines were approved for emergency use in 2020, they were approved based on their demonstrated ability to prevent symptomatic illness, he said.
And large clinical trials showed that the efficacy was high.
For example, the updated trial results reported to the Food and Drug Administration for full approval showed the Moderna vaccine was 93.2% effective in preventing symptomatic disease at least two weeks after the second dose in people 18 years of age and older.
The vaccines were also highly effective when they were first introduced to the public in the real world.
“The initial SARS-CoV-2 that we had, that initial wild type, the vaccine against it did work against infection,” Dr. Rochelle Walensky, director of the CDC, said in a recent interview on Fox News.
“It worked actually quite well against infection.
It also worked against severe disease and death.”
A promising early study from Israel showed that the vaccines had been more than 90% effective in preventing both symptomatic illness and asymptomatic infection in the early days after the rollout.
“That was really exciting because it meant that, maybe, we could vaccinate our way out of this pandemic,” Hotez said.
After the first variant, alpha, emerged, the vaccines remained highly effective against infection, severe disease and death, Walensky said.
In May 2021, the CDC said that those who were fully vaccinated could stop wearing masks.
Then the virus mutated, and the delta variant became dominant in the summer of 2021.
Recommendations Evolved With Variants
Although the vaccines remained effective against severe illness and death from COVID-19, they were somewhat less effective at preventing infection from delta.
That’s when the CDC reversed its recommendation and said that those who were vaccinated should wear a mask indoors.
That fall, the Biden administration made booster shots available.
The virus keeps changing, and subvariants of omicron are now dominant.
It’s become increasingly clear that the vaccines are less effective in preventing infection than they had been with earlier variants.
This is due to two things, Hotez said — changes to the virus and the natural decline in the potency of vaccination over time, which happens with most vaccines.
The CDC noted the waning effect of immunity from the vaccines in an August report explaining the most recent changes to its guidance on COVID-19 prevention, which included a recommendation for booster doses.
“Overall booster dose coverage in the United States remains low, which is concerning given the meaningful reductions in risk for severe illness and death that booster doses provide and the importance of booster doses to counter waning of vaccine-induced immunity,” according to the paper, which was published in the CDC’s Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report on Aug. 11.
It also noted that the vaccines are “highly protective” against severe disease and death, and that they offer “minimal protection against infection and transmission.”
That last part is what Victory and others highlighted, while neglecting to mention how effective the vaccines are against serious illness.
Victory claimed that the CDC had “acknowledged” that the vaccines were “essentially ineffective.”
But that’s not accurate.
As we said, the CDC explained that being up to date with vaccination offers minimal protection from infection, but, importantly, significant protection against severe disease.
Being up to date with vaccination means that you’ve gotten the primary series of doses and any boosters that are available for your age group, the CDC has explained.
“Being up to date with vaccination provides a transient period of increased protection against infection and transmission after the most recent dose, although protection can wane over time,” the CDC said.
The rates of hospitalization and death are “substantially higher” among unvaccinated adults, especially those 65 and older, compared with those who are up to date with vaccination, the CDC also said.
In fact, data from the COVID-19 Associated Hospitalization Surveillance Network for March 20 through May 31, 2022, showed: “Hospitalization rates among unvaccinated adults were 3.4 times as high as those among vaccinated adults,” according to an Aug. 26 CDC report.
Editor’s note: SciCheck’s COVID-19/Vaccination Project is made possible by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
The foundation has no control over FactCheck.org’s editorial decisions, and the views expressed in our articles do not necessarily reflect the views of the foundation.
The goal of the project is to increase exposure to accurate information about COVID-19 and vaccines, while decreasing the impact of misinformation.
Sources
Cox, Elizabeth.
“What is a coronavirus?”
Yale School of Medicine.
Updated 3 Sep 2020.
National Institutes of Health.
Press release.
“COVID-19 was third leading cause of death in the United States in both 2020 and 2021.”
5 Jul 2022.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
COVID Data Tracker.
Accessed 26 Aug 2022.
McDonald, Jessica.
“The Evolving Science of Face Masks and COVID-19.”
FactCheck.org. Updated 20 Jan 2022.
McDonald, Jessica.
“Unpacking WHO’s Asymptomatic COVID-19 Transmission Comments.”
FactCheck.org. 12 Jun 2020.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Press release.
“CDC streamlines COVID-19 guidance to help the public better protect themselves and understand their risk.”
11 Aug 2022.
Hotez, Peter.
Co-Director, Center for Vaccine Development at Texas Children’s Hospital.
Dean, National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine.
Telephone interview with FactCheck.org. 23
Aug 2022.
Walensky, Rochelle.
Interview with Neil Cavuto.
Your World.
Fox News.
23 Aug 2022.
Dagan, Noa, et al.
“BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19 Vaccine in a Nationwide Mass Vaccination Setting.”
New England Journal of Medicine.
15 Apr 2021.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Interim Public Health Recommendations for Fully Vaccinated People.
Updated 13 May 2021.
McDonald, Jessica.
“Vaccines Remain Largely Effective Against Delta Variant, Counter to Claims From Fox News Guest.”
FactCheck.org. Updated 10 Feb 2022.
Kiely, Eugene.
“Misinformation About Face Masks.”
FactCheck.org. 13 Aug 2021.
Cohen, Jon.
“How long do vaccines last?
The surprising answers may help protect people longer.”
Science.
18 Apr 2019.
Massetti, Greta, et al.
“Summary of Guidance for Minimizing the Impact of COVID-19 on Individual Persons, Communities, and Health Care Systems — United States, August 2022.”
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.
11 Aug 2022.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
“Stay Up to Date with COVID-19 Vaccines Including Boosters.”
Updated 23 Aug 2022.
Havers, Fiona, et al.
“Laboratory-Confirmed COVID-19–Associated Hospitalizations Among Adults During SARS-CoV-2 Omicron BA.2 Variant Predominance — COVID-19–Associated Hospitalization Surveillance Network, 14 States, June 20, 2021–May 31, 2022.”
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.
26 Aug 2022.
Key Takeaways The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have authorized a booster dose for everyone 5 years and older in the U.S.
A second mRNA booster dose is now authorized for certain individuals at increased risk for severe COVID-19 illness.
The Pfizer and Johnson & Johnson boosters will be the same dose as the initial vaccine, whereas Moderna’s will be a half dose.
Right now, the composition of the vaccines is the same as the initial series.
No vaccine has been altered to better target a COVID-19 variant, though Pfizer and Moderna are exploring that option.
The rollout of COVID-19 booster shots for some vaccine recipients began in late September—but only for select groups of people at increased risk for COVID-19 exposure or severe illness.
All three vaccines—Moderna, Pfizer, and Johnson & Johnson—were authorized for boosters as of November 2021.
Soon after, the FDA authorized a booster dose for all adults who completed their initial COVID-19 vaccine series.
The agency then expanded eligibility for the Pfizer booster to children and adolescents ages 5 to 17.
The CDC now recommends a COVID-19 booster for everyone 5 years and older who: Completed the Pfizer or Moderna primary vaccine series at least five months ago.
Received the Johnson & Johnson vaccine at least two months ago.
According to the CDC, eligible adults are able to choose any authorized COVID-19 booster.
However, it is now recommended that individuals get the Pfizer or Moderna mRNA COVID-19 vaccine over the Johnson & Johnson vaccine, following concerns about blood-clotting side effects.
The Johnson & Johnson shot still remains an option for those who are not able or willing to get a different vaccine.
Children and adolescents ages 5 to 17 who completed Pfizer's primary series are only eligible for the Pfizer booster.
The Pfizer and Johnson & Johnson boosters will be administered with the same dosage as the initial vaccine, whereas Moderna’s will be a half dose (50 mcg).
A third dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines has already been authorized by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for immunocompromised people who meet certain criteria.
The agency has also authorized additional mRNA booster doses for certain higher-risk individuals.
A second booster dose is now recommended for persons 12 years and older with certain kinds of immunocompromise and all adults 50 and older who have received an initial booster dose at least four months prior.
While vaccine makers are developing and testing next-generation COVID-19 vaccines that will offer better protection against variants of the virus, for now, booster shots won't be different from what people are already familiar with.
Philip Felgner, PhD, the director of the Vaccine Research and Development Center at the University of California, Irvine, tells Verywell that boosters will be “exactly the same" as what vaccinated people got the first time around when it comes to the makeup of the vaccine.
Same Shot, Different Day
In August, the FDA authorized a third vaccine dose for immunocompromised individuals 12 years and older who meet certain criteria.
That authorization was later expanded to include children ages five and up.
Shortly after the FDA’s authorization of third doses of the mRNA vaccines for immunocompromised people, President Biden announced a potential booster plan for other vaccinated people to start as soon as September 20.
The White House had originally stated that a person would be able to get a booster dose eight months after becoming fully vaccinated—pending FDA authorization of booster doses.
At this time, the FDA and CDC have authorized a booster shot for all three COVID-19 vaccines available in the U.S.
Whether someone is receiving the third dose as an immunocompromised person or a booster dose that's based on the timing of their last vaccine dose, Felgner says that the shots will be the same formulation as the ones people got before.
While Pfizer-BioNTech applied for authorization of its booster shot at the same dosage as the original vaccine, Moderna's booster application was for a 50-microgram dose—half of the initial dosage.
Third Dose vs. Boosters
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) has been clear about the distinction between a third vaccine dose and a booster shot.
The CDC states that “an additional dose is for people who may not have responded adequately to the initial two-dose regimen, specifically those who are moderate to severely immunocompromised.”
In a statement released on September 2, Kristen Nichols, PharmD, BCPS, BCPPS, BCIDP, a senior content management consultant pediatric infectious diseases for Wolters Kluwer, defined booster shots as “doses that are given to people who likely had an adequate initial response but whose immunity may have waned over time.”
Nichols clarified that boosters are for “your typical healthy person who got vaccinated originally but now needs to ‘re-invigorate’ that protection.”
Tackling Variants With Vaccines
While the boosters are more of the same, we may see updated COVID vaccines in the future.
“The technology is very agile,” says Felgner.
“And they will be able to change it or modify it and then make the next generation version as the virus mutates.”
In a press release, Pfizer-BioNTech announced that it is currently developing a COVID vaccine that “targets the full spike protein of the Delta variant.”
The updated version still needs to be thoroughly tested and vetted, and clinical trials are underway.
A new vaccine is not part of the White House booster rollout plan, and updates likely will not be called a “booster” shot.
"If we approach new COVID vaccines that target variants like we do the seasonal flu shot, it wouldn’t necessarily have a specific term,” says Nichols.
“New strains are incorporated into the flu vaccine each year based on which strains are expected to be circulating, and we continue to call that just the influenza vaccine.”
Will Boosters Work Against Variants?
Early data on booster doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines have been promising, but there are still some unknowns because of the virus variants that continue to emerge.
Pfizer and BioNTech submitted early-stage clinical trial data to the FDA.
In the trials, participants received a booster shot eight to nine months after their second dose.
According to a press release, the results showed that the third dose “elicited significantly higher neutralizing antibodies” against the initial SARS-CoV-2 strain as well as the Beta and Delta variants.
Moderna also initiated the data submission process of early clinical trial data.
For the Phase 2 clinical trial, participants received a booster dose six months after getting their second dose.
In a press release, Stéphane Bancel, Moderna CEO, said that the booster showed “robust antibody responses against the Delta variant.”
Omicron, a new variant of concern, contains more mutations than previous strains and is thought to spread more easily than the wild-type virus.
According to the CDC, the current COVID-19 vaccines are expected to protect against severe illness, hospitalizations, and deaths due to Omicron infection.
Data from preliminary studies conducted by Pfizer show that three doses of the Pfizer vaccine neutralize the Omicron variant, while two doses were significantly less protective.
Similarly, another current study (which has yet to be peer-reviewed) showed that those who received a booster dose of an mRNA vaccine (Moderna or Pfizer) had a strong cross-neutralizing response against Omicron, whereas neutralization was undetectable in most individuals who only completed the primary vaccination series.
As boosters begin to roll out for people who are already vaccinated, it’s important for those who are unvaccinated to initiate their first dose.
“This vaccine is very effective even with the Delta variant that is so aggressive,” says Felgner.
"It’s able to prevent the severest form of coronavirus infection.”
What This Means For You You can get a COVID-19 booster shot if you are 5 years and older and: Completed a COVID-19 mRNA vaccination series at least five months ago.
Received a Johnson & Johnson vaccine at least two months ago.
Persons ages 50 and older who received a booster shot at least four months prior are now eligible for a second booster dose.
If you’re immunocompromised, talk to a healthcare provider about receiving an additional dose.
The information in this article is current as of the date listed, which means newer information may be available when you read this.
For the most recent updates on COVID-19, visit our coronavirus news page.
The covid-19 pandemic has spurred a surge in the proportion of Californians who are dying at home rather than in a hospital or nursing home, accelerating a slow but steady rise that dates back at least two decades.
The recent upsurge in at-home deaths started in 2020, the first year of the pandemic, and the rate has continued to climb, outlasting the rigid lockdowns at hospitals and nursing homes that might help explain the initial shift.
Nearly 40% of deaths in California during the first 10 months of 2022 took place at home, up from about 36% for all of 2019, according to death certificate data from the California Department of Public Health.
By comparison, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data shows that about 26% of Californians died at home in 1999, the earliest year for which data on at-home deaths is accessible in the agency’s public database.
The trend is amplified among California residents with serious chronic conditions.
About 55% of Californians who died of cancer did so at home during the first 10 months of 2022, compared with 50% in 2019 and 44% in 1999.
About 43% of Californians who died of Alzheimer’s disease in the first 10 months of 2022 did so at home, compared with 34% in 2019 and nearly 16% in 1999.
Nationwide, the share of deaths occurring at home also jumped in 2020, to 33%, then rose to nearly 34% in 2021.
Nationwide data for 2022 is not yet available.
Covid’s early, deadly sweep across California does not in itself explain the increase in at-home death rates; the vast majority of people who have died of covid died in a hospital or nursing home.
Instead, medical experts said, the surge — at least initially — appears to coincide with sweeping policy changes in hospitals and nursing homes as caregivers struggled to contain a virus both virulent and little understood.
The sweeping bans on in-person visitation in hospitals and nursing homes, even to the bedsides of dying patients, created an agonizing situation for families.
Many chose to move a loved one back home.
“It was devastating to have Mom in a nursing home and dying, and the only way you can see Mom is through the window,” said Barbara Karnes, a registered nurse who has written extensively about end-of-life care.
At the same time, fears of covid exposure led many people to avoid hospitals in the first years of the pandemic, in some cases neglecting treatment for other serious conditions.
That, too, is thought to have contributed to the rise in at-home deaths.
Those who specialize in end-of-life care say it is no surprise the trend has continued even as visitation policies have eased.
They said more people simply want to die in a comfortable, familiar place, even if it means not fighting for every second of life with medical interventions.
“Whenever I ask, ‘Where do you want to be when you breathe your last breath?
Or when your heart beats its last beat?’
no one ever says, ‘Oh, I want to be in the ICU,’ or ‘Oh, I want to be in the hospital,’ or ‘I want to be in a skilled nursing facility.’
They all say, ‘I want to be at home,’” said John Tastad, coordinator for the advance care planning program at Sharp HealthCare in San Diego.
Meanwhile, the physicians who specialize in the diseases that tend to kill Americans, such as cancer and heart disease, have become more accepting of discussing home hospice as an option if the treatment alternatives likely mean painful sacrifices in quality of life.
“There's been a little bit of a culture change where maybe oncologists, pulmonologists, congestive heart failure physicians are referring patients to palliative care earlier to help with symptom management, advanced care planning,” said Dr. Pouria Kashkouli, associate medical director for hospice at UC Davis Health.
The trends have created a booming industry.
In 2021, the California Department of Health Care Access and Information listed 1,692 licensed hospice agencies in its tracking database, a leap from the 175 agencies it listed in 2002.
That much growth — and the money behind it — has sometimes led to problems.
A 2020 investigation by the Los Angeles Times found that fraud and quality-of-care issues were common in California’s hospice industry, a conclusion bolstered by a subsequent state audit.
Gov. Gavin Newsom signed a bill in 2021 that placed a temporary moratorium on most new hospice licenses and sought to rein in questionable kickbacks to doctors and agencies.
When done correctly, though, home hospice can be a comfort to families and patients.
Hospice typically lasts anywhere from a few days to a few months, and while services vary, many agencies provide regular visits from nurses, health aides, social workers, and spiritual advisers.
Most people using hospice are insured through the federal Medicare program.
The amount Medicare pays varies by region but is usually around $200 to $300 a day, said Dr. Kai Romero, chief medical officer at the nonprofit Hospice by the Bay.
To find quality end-of-life care, Andrea Sankar, a professor at Wayne State University and author of “Dying at Home: A Family Guide for Caregiving,” recommends seeking out nonprofit providers and having a list of questions prepared: How often will nurses visit in person?
In what circumstances do patients have access to a physician?
What help will be available for a crisis in the middle of the night?
While hospice providers offer crucial guidance and support, families need to be prepared to shoulder the bulk of the caregiving.
“It really takes a pretty evolved family system to be able to rally to meet all of the needs,” said Tastad at Sharp HealthCare.
Several end-of-life experts said they expect the proportion of Californians choosing to die at home to keep climbing, citing a variety of factors: Medical advances will make it easier for patients to receive pain management and other palliative care at home; telemedicine will make it easier for patients to consult doctors from home; and two powerful forces in American health care — insurance companies and the federal government — increasingly see dying at home as an affordable alternative to lengthy hospital stays.
Phillip Reese is a data reporting specialist and an assistant professor of journalism at California State University-Sacramento.
This story was produced by KHN, which publishes California Healthline, an editorially independent service of the California Health Care Foundation.
Although rare, skin rashes and other changes may be a sign of COVID-19.
Research has found that some people develop a COVID rash in response to high inflammation in the body.
A study published in 2021 found that skin rashes might be less common than other signs of COVID-19.
Still, the researchers point out that people can easily recognize skin changes, which may help detect the virus.
Read on to learn how to identify some of the most common COVID-19 rashes.
Illustration by Paige McLaughlin for Health
What Causes a COVID-19 Rash?
Skin rashes are a rare symptom of COVID-19.
Still, "[i]t's not unique that a virus would give you a skin rash," Mona Gohara, MD, a medical and surgical dermatologist based in Connecticut, told Health.
There's a lack of research on how and why COVID-19 rashes occur.
Some evidence suggests a few theories.
For example, research has found that a high number of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors in the skin may cause rashes.
ACE2 is a protein by which SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, enters your body.
A high density of ACE2 receptors in your skin may trigger a skin rash.
Other theories suggest that SARS-COV-2 in the tiny blood vessels supplying your skin may activate the release of cytokines, or proteins that regulate inflammation.
High inflammation may cause a rash and itchy bumps, among other skin changes.
Types of COVID-19 Rashes
The authors of the 2021 study found a possible link between a positive COVID-19 test result and skin rashes.
The researchers found that, among 336,847 people, 8.8% of those who tested positive reported skin-related changes.
A rash was the only symptom for nearly 21% of people who tested positive for COVID-19, and 17% had skin changes before other symptoms developed.
The authors worked with the British Association of Dermatologists (BAD) to create a catalog of images of the most common skin manifestations of COVID‐19.
Here are the main categories of possible skin changes to help you identify what a COVID-19 rash might look like.
COVID Toes
This photo contains medical imagery.
See Image BRITISH ASSOCIATION OF DERMATOLOGISTS
COVID toes resemble chilblains, or pernio, a skin condition that typically occurs after exposure to cold weather.
You may develop purple or red sores on your toes.
Some people may notice sores on their fingers.
The top layer of your skin may peel away as COVID toes heal.
You may notice scaly patches where the sores were.
COVID toes may happen months after the initial infection, Veronique Bataille, MD, Ph.D. and Mario Falchi, PhD, two of the authors of the 2021 study, told Health.
COVID toes are more common in young people who may not have had symptoms, said Dr. Bataille and Falchi.
COVID Hives (or Urticarial)
This photo contains medical imagery.
See Image BRITISH ASSOCIATION OF DERMATOLOGISTS
COVID hives, or urticaria, appear suddenly and, over hours, quickly come and go.
Hives are usually itchy and can affect any body part, including the face.
According to the BAD, COVID hives can appear early on and last long after you fully recover from COVID-19.
Neck Eczema
Neck eczema can appear during or after COVID-19 infection and typically lasts for an extended period.
The rash is usually itchy and can extend to the part of the chest exposed to sunlight.
Generally, eczema may look pink on lighter skin or dark brown, gray, or purple on darker skin.
You do not have to have a history of eczema for neck eczema to develop, said Dr. Bataille.
Most people included in the 2021 survey had no history of skin conditions.
Oral Rash
With oral rash, the inside of your mouth and lips may feel sore.
As the rash subsides, your lips may become dry and scaly.
Vesicular and Papular Rash
This photo contains medical imagery.
See Image BRITISH ASSOCIATION OF DERMATOLOGISTS
Vesicles are fluid-filled bumps, while papular lesions are raised, solid bumps.
Vesicular and papular rashes are typically itchy.
These rashes can pop up anywhere on your body, but they usually develop on:
Backs of your feet and hands
Elbows
Knees
Sometimes, vesicular and papular rashes are not so easy to identify.
For example, the rashes may appear as tiny bumps all over your skin.
In people with COVID-19, vesicular and papular rashes can last long after the contagious stage is over.
These rashes can appear many weeks after the onset of the infection.
Pityriasis Rosea
Pityriasis rosea, or a "herald patch," usually begins as a large circular or oval spot on your abdomen, back, or chest.
Small spots later appear on your torso and arms.
The spots often look like a Christmas tree in shape.
Pityriasis rosea may last several months before clearing.
Purpuric or Vasculitic Rashes
This photo contains medical imagery.
See Image BRITISH ASSOCIATION OF DERMATOLOGISTS
Purpuric or vasculitic rashes appear as deep, purple or red spots and may cause bruise-like patches.
Damage to your tiny blood vessels causes bleeding into your skin.
As a result, purplish discoloration appears on your skin.
Viral Exanthem
This photo contains medical imagery.
See Image BRITISH ASSOCIATION OF DERMATOLOGISTS
Viral exanthem is a common, widespread rash that occurs with viral infections, such as COVID-19.
The rash is typically symmetrical, with multiple reddish blotches or bumps all over the body.
Viral exanthem may appear alongside other symptoms of a viral illness, such as cough and fever.
How To Treat a COVID-19 Rash
Some COVID-19 rashes go away on their own without treatment, such as COVID toes.
If you have itching or pain, you can apply an over-the-counter (OTC) hydrocortisone cream to the affected area.
Other treatments for COVID-19 rashes depend on the type of skin changes you have and may include anticoagulants, antihistamines, or corticosteroids.
Those medicines work by reducing inflammation in your body, which may reduce the appearance of skin rashes.
Some of those treatments are available in oral or topical forms.
"Your dermatologist can help you with your skin by suggesting treatments for any painful lesions, but stay safe and call them or arrange a visit virtually," Mary Stevenson, MD, a dermatologic surgeon at NYU Langone Health, told Health.
Let a dermatologist know if you have COVID-19 symptoms or have tested positive.
When To See a Healthcare Provider
COVID-19 rashes have no long-term effects, with most clearing up on their own, said Dr. Bataille and Falchi.
Still, you may want to consult a dermatologist if at-home treatments fail or your COVID-19 rash worsens.
"For some, the rashes are quite recurrent and can come and go for weeks and months," said Dr. Bataille and Falchi.
"Some of the rashes can be very itchy and affect sleep, so there may be a need for a prescription from a [a healthcare provider].
"
In rare cases, a skin rash that develops days to weeks after COVID-19 infection is a multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS) symptom.
MIS is a severe condition in which inflammation affects your brain, gut, heart, and skin.
Seek medical attention right away if you develop a skin rash alongside other MIS symptoms like:
Bloodshot eyes
Diarrhea
Low blood pressure, which may make you feel dizzy or lightheaded
Stomach pain
Vomiting
A Quick Review
Skin rashes and other changes are rare symptoms of COVID-19.
Being able to identify different types of COVID-19 rashes may help detect the virus and keep it from spreading.
Consider taking a test if you develop a skin rash or other COVID-19 symptoms.
If you test positive, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) advises isolating for five days and wearing a high-quality mask through day 10.
Seek immediate medical attention if you develop worsening or severe symptoms like blue lips or skin and trouble breathing.
The information in this story is accurate as of press time.
However, as the situation surrounding COVID-19 continues to evolve, it's possible that some data have changed since publication.
While Health is trying to keep our stories as up-to-date as possible, we also encourage readers to stay informed on news and recommendations for their own communities by using the CDC, WHO, and their local public health department as resources.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a highly contagious respiratory disease resulting from severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection.
It was identified as the third lethal coronavirus outbreak in December 2019 after SARS-CoV and the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV)
[1], and on January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared it a Global Public Health Emergency
[2].
The clinical presentation and prognosis of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients vary greatly, ranging from asymptomatic cases to severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and multiple organ dysfunction syndromes
[3].
In addition, considering that the COVID-19 pandemic has had a devastating impact on global health and is primarily driven by dysregulated immune responses, understanding its pathophysiology has been a pressing need since the beginning of the outbreak [4].
Studies have shown that dysregulation of cytokines resulting from uncontrolled activation of the innate immune system, the release of damage-associated molecular patterns during tissue injury, and an increased occurrence of thrombotic events are all associated with the functioning and malfunctioning of neutrophils [5].
Specifically, the increased formation of low-density neutrophils (LDNs) and the generation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) play significant roles in the immunopathology of the disease and are closely correlated with its severity and poor prognosis [5,6,7].
Neutrophils, the most abundant type of leukocytes in human circulation, account for approximately 50–70% of all leukocytes [8].
Traditionally, neutrophils were believed to primarily function as immediate immune defenders against bacterial and fungal pathogens
[9].
However, recent research has revealed that the role of neutrophils is more complex and diverse than previously thought, as they were also found to play a key role in the defense against viral infections, including respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), influenza A virus (IAV), highly pathogenic avian influenza virus, and vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)
[10].
During an infection, pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS), lipoteichoic acid, proteins, ribonucleic acid (RNA) and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), are released and recognized by the immune system, which then bind to various pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs) to initiate the recruitment of neutrophils to the site of tissue damage [11].
Activated neutrophils can release a range of pro-inflammatory mediators, such as interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-8 (IL-8), interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)
[12, 13].
These mediators play a crucial role in recruiting other immune cells to the site of infection.
However, excessive activation of neutrophils can lead to oxidative stress, local and systemic inflammation and subsequent damage to the endothelium of capillaries, contributing to an increased incidence of thrombotic events [3].
(Fig. 1)
Fig. 1
The schematic representation of neutrophils in COVID-19 Full size image
Following a rise in COVID cases and hospitalizations across the country this summer, as well as a "mini-surge" in the Chicago area, questions have surfaced about what precipitated the uptick and whether it can be traced to a specific variant.
The EG.5 omicron subvariant, also commonly known as Eris, accounts for the largest number of U.S. COVID infections compared to any other strain, according to the latest data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
From a nearly two-week period beginning on July 23 and ending on Aug. 5, EG.5 was responsible for more than 17% of all U.S. COVID cases, a jump of 5% compared to two weeks earlier.
In response to a rise in cases globally, the World Health Organization on Wednesday classified EG.5 as a variant of interest.
A descendant of the XBB sublineage XBB.1.9.2, EG.5 has one additional spike mutation, allowing it to evade immunity easier than others.
While first detected in Feb. 2023, the WHO added EG.
5 to its list of variants under monitoring on July 19.
When it comes to symptoms, they appear to largely mirror those experienced with other COVID infections.
"EG.5 has been detected in the U.S. recently, but the data we have gleaned from the global circulation of the virus has shown that its symptoms are the same as other variants," Andrew Pekosz, a professor in Molecular Microbiology and Immunology with the John Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, said in an article.
"Its disease potential appears to be exactly the same as other variants’ as well.
"
People who contract COVID may exhibit a wide range of symptoms, including the common ones listed below, as defined by the CDC:
Fever or chills
Cough
Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
Fatigue
Muscle or body aches
Headache
New loss of taste or smell
Sore throat
Congestion or runny nose
Nausea or vomiting
Diarrhea
In an email to NBC Chicago on Thursday, a CDC spokesperson said guidance and information on the agency's website hadn't changed -- despite the emergence of new strains.
Feeling out of the loop?
We'll catch you up on the Chicago news you need to know.
Sign up for the weekly Chicago Catch-Up newsletter here.
When compared to other XBB variants, EG.5 is likely more transmissible, Dr. Sharon Nachman, chief of the division of pediatric infectious diseases at Stony Brook Children’s Hospital, told TODAY.com.
However, it's unclear why that is the case.
"If it was equally transmissible, then we wouldn't see it gaining strength number-wise compared to some of the other variants," said Nachman, adding that EG.5 quickly pushed out other XBB variants in the U.S., which were dominant earlier this summer.
EG.5 has shown increased prevalence, growth and immune escape properties, but it doesn't appear to be more severe than others, as stated in a recent WHO report.
"It's been quite a long time since boosters were provided for COVID, and those boosters did have a relatively low uptake rate in the population," Pekosz said.
"That, combined with the fact that the XBB variants look different to your immune system from the [variants used in] previous COVID vaccines.
"
But if you're due for a COVID shot, you might want to consider getting the new booster once it rolls out in the fall.
While the booster won't be specifically designed to target EG.5, the basis for the new vaccine will be the XBB variants, which are closely associated with it.
"There should be a nice match between that vaccine and the EG.5 variant, as well as the other XBB variants that are circulating right now," Pekosz said.
As the COVID-19 pandemic enters its fourth year, hospitals and health systems caring for patients with long COVID are assessing financial strategies and tools for sustainable, ongoing care.
As SARS-CoV-2 infections and reinfections continue, many patients are comparing the first waves of infections in 2020 with the comparative mildness of Omicron-associated variants in 2022 and 2023.
As a result, many have already declared that the pandemic is over — or at least that the end is in sight — as an endemic assumes its place and long-term mitigation strategies are discussed.
However, millions of people are still struggling with the aftermath known as long COVID.
Affecting nearly one in five people who have had COVID-19, long COVID involves symptoms that persist for at least two months that can’t be attributed to another diagnosis.
From heart palpitations to recurring headaches, depression and poor concentration, long COVID symptoms impact quality of life and potentially even functional abilities.
They also impose an economic burden, potentially for years to come.
One Harvard economist estimates a $528 billion increase in medical spending for long COVID and Kaufman Hall reported hospitals ended 2022 with negative margins due to labor costs and higher emergency department volumes - exacerbated by the pandemic.
With some experts eyeing a future besieged by these long-haul effects and their associated costs, should hospitals brace for a financial hit?
Impacts and implications of long COVID
In a detailed UpToDate article about the evaluation and management of long COVID, the physician authors explore some of the most common prolonged symptoms, including fatigue, chest pain, cough and difficulty breathing.
Those four symptoms have accounted for a large proportion of physical manifestations of long COVID, although others such as dizziness, insomnia and joint pain have also been identified.
Psychological and cognitive symptoms, including challenges with memory and concentration, have also been reported.
Some patients have experienced serious concerns, such as post-acute intensive care syndrome (PICS) and cardiac complications.
Roughly 10 to 20% of hospitalized patients are readmitted for these reasons or others.
Researchers have still been limited in their study of long COVID owing to a dearth of data.
For the most part, anecdotal stories among “long-haulers” have informed much of what clinicians know about the phenomenon.
As more funding and efforts go toward monitoring the prevalence and understanding the implications of long COVID, it could change how hospitals prepare for any future waves.
Challenges with mounting healthcare costs
The financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic goes beyond just patients with recurring infections or lingering health challenges.
It also effects hospitals in caring for patients with chronic conditions who delayed care out of concern for contracting the virus in health settings.
Caring for long COVID patients
Predicting the financial impacts of long COVID will be central to hospitals’ preparation for potential long COVID waves.
COVID-19 already requires expensive care: In a study assessing the cost burden of COVID-19, researchers found that people who were infected drove higher total costs within the five months after their diagnosis.
An increasing number of high-acuity patients also drives length of stay.
And as an American Hospital Association report put it in 2021, a changing inpatient population requiring more intensive care will offset any revenue increases those additional volumes bring in.
Considering the roughly 16.3 million Americans with long COVID — likely to be joined by more in the future — the bottom-line impacts absorbed by hospitals could become more palpable.
But long COVID is just one costly and lingering effect of the pandemic.
Many indirect impacts of COVID-19 could also jeopardize future hospital profitability.
Patients with chronic conditions delayed care
Additionally, many hospitals are still grappling with the wave of patients resulting from delayed care during the pandemic, including people whose cancers were detected in later stages or whose undiagnosed heart conditions progressed to an advanced state.
Cardiologists point to a potential wave of heart disease and heart failure patients in the next five years.
As COVID-19 took priority in 2020 onward, the continuum dropped its preventive focus.
Like long-haulers, these populations could all require more costly inpatient and outpatient care as their symptoms continue.
As these new patient populations emerge, the financial implications of caring for them join other stressors.
Changing reimbursement models, increased costs, supply constraints and staff shortages weigh on providers, while lackluster margins are still 37% lower than pre-pandemic.
Suffice it to say, it’s tough out there.
Hospitals and clinicians will have to adapt to meet these continuing challenges.
What hospitals and health systems can do to respond
Organizations such as the American Hospital Association have exposed many of the financial burdens that hospitals face today, calling on federal leaders to provide more support.
But in the absence of immediate help, many health systems have pushed austerity efforts to bolster the books.
Among their strategies: Squeezing out savings from the supply chain, consolidating contracts, consolidating themselves, and staking their spending on a demonstrable return on investment.
In addition to reigning in expenses, they are also driving revenue by enabling more expansive care delivery models, such as telemedicine.
Opportunities to improve the quality of care can also improve cost management, particularly as reimbursement models move toward value-based care.
Increasingly, healthcare executives are turning to technology and tools to standardize clinical surveillance, support patient education, and better understand health data analytics.
With these tools powering everyday workflows, organizations can better support patient outcomes, population health management and productivity while averting costly effects like readmissions, nonadherence and adverse health events.
Controlling health costs in an unknown future
The COVID-19 pandemic has been barely predictable weeks ahead of time, much less months or years out.
But the financial impact of a changing population of long COVID patients is setting back an already hurting hospital industry.
With long COVID’s direct and indirect clinical effects exacerbating other challenges like supply and staff shortages, leaders will need to double down on efforts to optimize and standardize care delivery, despite the unknowns.
Explore our free clinical COVID-19 resources as well as our portfolio of industry-leading clinical and operational solutions to reduce healthcare costs, support patient outcomes, and standardize clinical operations.
Sample collection and diagnostics
This work complies with all relevant ethical regulations and was performed under protocol IRB-55580, which was approved by the Stanford University School of Medicine IRB; its most recent approval was 5/6/2021.
Residual VTM from SARS-CoV-2 positive nasopharyngeal swabs collected during clinical assessment of asymptomatic and symptomatic patients at Stanford Healthcare were used in accordance with the Stanford School of Medicine Institutional Review Board.
Participants were not compensated.
Since samples were residual and not linked to identifiable medical records, our IRB classified this study as low risk and informed consent was waived.
RT-qPCR targeting the envelope gene or ORF1ab was used to detect infection.
Positive samples were defined as those crossing threshold (CT) of 40 cycles or less on the RT-qPCR or positive Transcription-Mediated Amplification (TMA) diagnostic tests used at Stanford Health Care clinical laboratory31.
Where multiple samples were collected from the same individual, the COVID-19+ sample taken at the time of highest severity score was used for low pass WGS.
Negative controls were confirmed to have no positive COVID-19 nasal swab tests in our system.
EHR data abstraction and severity score development
A critical task is to determine for every sampled patient the disease severity from the Electronic Health Records (EHR).
To accomplish this task, we used as the “COVID-19 Clinical Severity Scale” an adapted version of the “Ordinal Scale for Clinical Improvement” proposed by the World Health Organization in the COVID-19 Therapeutic Trial Synopsis (Draft February 18, 2020, Supplementary Table 1).
This scale categorized the COVID-19 severity according to the level of care and oxygen support.
Scores 1 to 2 include patients not requiring supplemental oxygen support or hospitalization.
However, the WHO definition of these scores were modified due to their vague scope.
Thus, score “1”, originally described as “no limitation of activities”, was modified to “asymptomatic patient”, and score “2”, from “limitation of activities” to “symptomatic patient” (symptoms were extracted and curated from EHR billed diagnoses).
Scores 3 to 4 include patients hospitalized, with score 4 assigned only to those requiring non-invasive supplemental oxygen (oxygen mask).
Scores 5 to 7 are defined as “severe disease” based on level of oxygen support.
Thus, “score 5” is for patients requiring high flow oxygen and “score 6” mechanical ventilation.
“Score 7” includes critically ill patients requiring, in addition to ventilation, the administration of specific medications (pressors), dialysis, or extracorporeal membrane ventilation (ECMO).
A custom algorithm was written that abstracted digital phenotypes from each chart (see Supplementary Table 1, “EHR annotations”).
First, SARS-CoV-2 positive status was confirmed based on clinical test reports abstracted from the EHR.
SARS-CoV-2 negative patients were assigned a score of zero.
For SARS-CoV-2 positive patients, starting with the highest score (8, death) and working down, if criteria were met, the individual was assigned that score.
If no clinical notes were available for data abstraction, then a severity score was not assigned and these individuals were not included in severity score based analyses.
We calculated the score for any given date and assigned the maximum value according to the EHR annotations defined for every score (Supplementary Table 1).
For example, patients with annotations for both ventilation and the administration of pressors received a score “7” for that day.
Clinical data were obtained through the STAnford Research Repository (STARR), a Stanford Medicine’s approved resource for working with clinical data for research purposes extracted from the Epic database management system used by the Stanford hospitals.
Specifically, we queried the STRIDE data management system, which is populated from patients’ observational clinical, research, and biospecimen data11.
A summary of characteristics of patients included in each analysis described below is available in Supplementary Data 2.
Nucleic acid extraction
Host genomic DNA was extracted from 200ul of VTM inoculated with nasopharyngeal swabs.
Using a modified Qiagen DNEASY blood and tissue kit protocol and quantified using fluorometric readings (Protocols.io https://doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bi8xkhxn).
Total RNA was extracted from 200ul of VTM using a modified Ambion mirVana mRNA kit protocol (Protocols.io https://doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bi8ykhxw) or Zymo Research Quick-Viral RNA extraction kits (R1041) and quantified using fluorometric readings.
Host gDNA library preparation and sequencing
Using 1-10 ng of host gDNA, the Illumina Nextera Flex library preparation was performed according to manufacturer’s protocol (Protocols.io https://doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bi8zkhx6).
To allow for multiplexing, gDNA was barcoded using IDT-ILMN Nextera DNA UD Indices, a set of 10 bp index adapters from Illumina.
Indexed samples were diluted to 4 nM, pooled, and analyzed on an Agilent TapeStation to ensure the mean DNA fragment size was ~300 bp.
Pooling and library quality was further assessed by sequencing the pool using a V3 MiSeq flow cell.
160 samples were pooled and sequenced for 76 cycles, paired end reads.
For the purpose of QC, ~50 million reads were obtained and Q30 was determined to be >92%.
If needed the pool was normalized (balanced) to ensure equal representation of each sample.
The library was then sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 using an S4 300 cycle flow cell.
Viral RNA library preparation and sequencing
After extraction, RNA acquired from 100 ul nasal swab media was incubated with recombinant RNAse-free DNase (Qiagen, Inc.) per manufacturer’s instructions for 15 minutes, followed by SPRI bead (GE Healthcare) purification to remove residual DNA remaining in each sample.
A fixed volume (5uL) of the resulting RNA from each sample, together with a fixed mass (25 pg) of the External RNA Controls Consortium RNA spike-in mix (ERCC RNA spike-in mix, Thermo Fisher), served as input for SARS-CoV-2 metatranscriptomic next generation sequencing (mNGS) library preparation (https://doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.beshjeb6; a modification of Deng et al.32).
For samples collected after May 2020, SARS-CoV-2 ARTIC V3 amplicon libraries were made from extracted total nucleic acid for whole genome sequencing using previously reported protocols [1].
Briefly, 3 ul of total nucleic acid was used as input for a randomly primed cDNA synthesis reaction.
This cDNA served as input for 30 cycles of amplification with ARTIC V3 primers (https://github.com/artic-network/artic-ncov2019), and was then diluted 1:100 before tagmentation.
Adaptor tagmentation was performed using homebrew Tn5, and 8 cycles of index PCR was performed using unique dual barcode Nextera indices (Detailed protocol: https://protocols.io/view/artic-neb-tagmentation-protocol-high-throughput-wh-bt66nrhe).
Final libraries were pooled at equal volumes and cleaned at 0.7x (SPRI: Sample) using SPRIselect beads.
Library was sequenced on Illumina Novaseq SP platform in a paired-end 2 ×150 cycle run.
An incubation step with 1:10 dilution of FastSelect (Qiagen) reagent was included between the RNA fragmentation and first strand synthesis steps of the library prep to deplete highly abundant host rRNA sequences present in each sample.
Equimolar pools (n = 160–384 samples) of the resulting individual dual-barcoded library preps were subjected to paired-end 2 x 150 bp sequence analysis on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 (S2 or equivalent flow cell) to yield approximately 50 million reads per sample.
Viral and metagenomic alignment and metagenomics analysis
For SARS-CoV-2 genomes, FASTQ sequences were aligned to the SARS-CoV-2 reference genome NC_045512.2 using minimap233.
Non-SARS-CoV-2 reads were filtered out with Kraken234, using an index of human and viral genomes in RefSeq (index downloaded from https://genexa.ch/sars2-bioinformatics-resources/).
Spiked primers for viral enrichment were trimmed from the ends of short reads using ivar35.
Finally, a pileup of the aligned reads was generated with samtools36, and consensus genomes were called with ivar.
The full pipeline used is publicly available on Github (https://github.com/czbiohub/sc2-illumina-pipeline).
All viral consensus sequences were uploaded to the GISAID database (https://www.gisaid.org/).
Host and metagenomic RNA alignment was performed using STAR run against a combined index of the human reference genome GRCh38, SARS-CoV2 (SARSCoV2_NC_045512.2), and ERCC spike-ins.
STAR parameters were chosen to avoid bias towards GTAG eukaryotic splice signatures for both the viral RNA and host RNA analyses.
Metagenomic classification of reads unmapped to both SARS-CoV2 and human was performed using KrakenUniq37.
KrakenUniq parameters (>=100 kmers and duplication < = less kmers) were chosen to avoid false positives.
From the filtered KrakenUniq output, an abundance table was created by finding the kmer percentages (kmers divided by the total kmer count) for relevant taxa detected for each individual.
This table included only well-represented taxa, which was defined as those appearing in at least 10% of patients.
A uniform manifold approximation (UMAP) plot was then created from this table using fifteen nearest neighbors.
In order to identify associations between specific microbial species and degree of severity of COVID symptoms for each patient, we used a linear regression of severity against each species’ abundance separately and used BMI, sex, and age as covariates of the analysis.
The significance of the association was thresholded at a Bonferroni adjusted p-value of 7e-04.
Host genome sequence alignment
Low-coverage FASTQ sequences underwent quality control assessment via FastQC v0.11.8 before alt-aware alignment to GRCh38.p12 using BWA-MEM v0.7.17-r1188.
Duplicate sequences were marked with MarkDuplicates of the Picard Tools suite v2.21.2.
After duplicate marking, base quality score recalibration was performed with Picard Tools’ BaseRecalibrator and high-confidence variant call sets from dbSNP and the 1000 Genomes Project.
Quality control metrics, including coverage, were generated with Qualimap BAMQC v2.2.1, Samtools v1.10, and Mosdepth v0.2.9.
Finally, quality control reports for each sample were aggregated using MultiQC v1.9.
Reproducible code and steps are available at Protocols.io (https://www.protocols.io/private/8CFBD1AD8FE611EA815E0A58A9FEAC2A).
All high confidence calls were contributed to the COVID-19 Host Genetics Initiative3.
Variant calling, imputation, PCA, kinship
BAM files were used for an initial calling with bcftools v1.9 mpileup38.
To account for the low-coverage sequencing we used the GLIMPSE algorithm v1.0 for imputation and phasing15.
Briefly, this algorithm uses a reference set of haplotypes (1000 Genomes Project samples in our case) to compute genotype likelihoods using a Gibbs sampling procedure.
The imputed data were filtered for low imputation scores (INFO > 0.8), and were then merged with a reference set that contained samples from: (1) the 1000 Genomes Project39, (2) the Human Genome Diversity Project (HGDP)40, and (3) the Simons Genome Diversity Project (SGDP)41.
Pre-filtering, there were 1194 samples in our patient data set, and 3558 in the reference set.
1062 remained in our patient cohort after sample QC, and from the reference set 1359 samples were used for ancestry analyses.
While merging these data, we set minor allele count (MAC) thresholds for our data at 2 (MAF 0.0008) and for the reference set at 5 (MAF 0.0007) (e.g., MAC > 4 using bcftools), and a stringent call rate threshold (--geno 0.01 in PLINK2)42,43.
The resulting VCF was loaded into PLINK2 v2.00a3LM using the following flags: dosage = DS, --import-dosage-certainty 0.8.
These merged data had 4,111,339 autosomal variants that survived the filters above.
PLINK2 was then used for LD pruning (--indep-pairwise 500 10 0.1) and PCA (--maf 0.01 --pca).
We also extracted the kinship matrix of our samples using the King algorithm (--make-king in PLINK2)44.
Missingness data by chromosome is available in Supplementary Data 3.
For admixture mapping, all individuals with third degree (cousins) or lower relatives in the dataset were removed.
Genetic Ancestry Inference and majority-vote assignation
Genetic ancestry was determined by running supervised local ancestry inference (RFMix v2.03)45 on the above phased and imputed patient genomes using a training reference panel of single ancestry samples selected from the 1000 Genomes Project, HGDP, and SGDP via unsupervised genetic clustering (ADMIXTURE)46 at K = 7 (N = 1359).
Only individuals with greater than 0.95 assignment to one of the seven unsupervised clusters in that ADMIXTURE analysis were used as references for RFMix.
The cluster labels--African (AFR), East Asian (EAS), South Asian (SAS), Oceanian (Australo-Papuan) (OCE), European (EUR), West Asian (WAS), and Indigenous American (NAT)--were chosen to reflect the biogeographic origin of the reference samples found in each unsupervised cluster.
The number of individuals thus included in the RFMix reference training are as follows: AFR- 382, EAS- 494, EUR- 155, NAT- 75, OCE- 16, SAS- 171, WAS- 66.
Local genetic ancestry assignments along the genome were then summed to create overall genetic ancestry proportions for each sample.
These were used for barplots, covariates for regression analyses, and for making individual genetic ancestry assignments.
Individual genetic ancestry labels (e.g., for determination of enrichment in cases vs. controls (Fig. 1F), association with viral clades (Fig. 1H) and controlling HLA associations with severe disease by genetic ancestry) were assigned based on these overall proportions via the following decision sequence: some Oceanian (Australo-Papuan) ancestry (Pacific Islanders)47 >5%, some Indigenous American ancestry >10%, West Asian >50%, South Asian >50%, East Asian >50%, European >50%, African >50%.
For individuals meeting none of these criteria an ancestry label consisting of the two predominant ancestries was given (e.g., East Asian and European in Fig.
1F).
Admixture mapping association analyses
Admixture mapping association analyses were used to regress the residual of severity of COVID symptoms for each patient--after correcting for associations with overall genetic ancestry proportion, BMI, sex, and age--against the local ancestry of each particular window of the genome for that patient48.
With the genome subdivided into 19,474 windows for local genomic ancestry assignment, and assuming complete independence between each, a naive Bonferroni corrected p-value of 2.57*10^−6 is obtained for genome-wide significance at p = 0.05; however, the genomic ancestry of neighboring, linked genomic windows is not independent and depends upon the characteristic length of each ancestry segment distribution, itself a function of the time since admixture in each population.
A less stringent multiple-test correction factor that incorporates this distribution was determined by considering the spectral density evaluated at frequency zero of an autoregressive model of local ancestries19, yielding an effective number of tests for each ancestry.
This overall effective number of tests was taken over only samples that had at least 5% of that ancestry represented across their autosomes.
Using this framework, together with the spectrum0.ar function implemented in the R package coda v 0.19, p-value thresholds for genome-wide significance at p = 0.05 for each ancestry were determined:
African 2.54*10^−3, East Asian 3.89*10^−3, Indigenous American 1.15*10^−3, Oceanian 6.93*10^−3, South Asian 2.21*10^−3, and European/West Asian 1.83*10^−3.
Variants assessed as significant by this correction are described in Supplementary Data 1.
An additional analysis was performed in which case and control labels were randomly permuted amongst the samples to generate 1000 separate datasets, association analyses were then performed on each of these replicate datasets.
To obtain a study-specific null distribution, the lowest p value for each of these permuted replicates was recorded, and a study-specific p-value threshold (.05 quantile of this aggregate distribution of minimal p values) was obtained for each ancestry: African 5.39*10^−4, East Asian 6.1*10^−3, Indigenous American 1.84*10^−3, Oceanian 2.05*10^−6, South Asian 5.3*10^−4, and European/West Asian 1.73*10*−2.
Two associations are significant under both of these thresholds: an association on chromosome 14 (43962800-44734273, p-value 1.6e−08) with Oceanian ancestry and an association on chromosome 21 (36748417-38748006, p-value 5.1e−04) with African ancestry.
Host HLA sequencing and typing
Host genomic DNA samples ranging from 22-75 ng were batched in sets of 46 plus one positive and one negative control.
AllType™ FASTplex™ NGS Assay kits (One Lambda, A Thermo Fisher Scientific Brand, Canoga Park, CA) were used to prepare DNA sequencing libraries for 11 classical HLA genes (HLA-A, HLA-C, HLA-B, HLA-DRB3, HLA-DRB4, HLA-DRB5, HLA-DRB1, HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1, HLA-DPA1, and HLA-DPB1).
As the success of the DNA sequencing is dependent on the initial target amplification and the subsequent library preparation, the following changes were made to the manufacturer’s protocol: (1) increased input DNA volume to 8.6 µl while maintaining the manufacturer’s recommended multiplex PCR protocol per sample; (2) eluted DNA in 12 µl of suspension buffer after the initial amplicon purification, and proceeded to the library preparation without normalization process; (3) increased the number of thermal cycles to 17 in the final DNA library amplification; (4) eluted DNA fragments in 22 µl for DNA sequencing.
500 µl of 1.3 pM
DNA sequencing library was loaded into a MiniSeq Mid Output Kit (300-cycles) (FC-420-1004), and sequenced using MiniSeq DNA sequencer (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA).
A total of 429 subjects (301 cases, 128 SARS-CoV-2 negative controls) yielded interpretable sequence reads to generate HLA genotypes.
We supplemented these samples with sequencing of buffy coat or whole blood collected from high severity COVID-19 patients collected from hospitalized patients (n = 193).
Fastq files were automatically imported into the TypeStream Visual NGS Analysis Software Version 2.0 upon the completion of DNA sequencing, and bioinformatically processed for DNA sequence assembly and HLA genotype assignments with IPD IMGT/HLA Database release version 3.39.049.
We modified the software setting so that a maximum of 1.5 million sequences or 750,000 paired-end sequences are used for the sequence assembly and HLA allele assignments.
We visually inspected the HLA genotype calls by the software, and made corrections as needed.
The approved HLA genotype results were exported in Histoimmunogenetics Markup Language (HML) format50, and generated comma separated value (CSV) reports for HLA genotypes, HLA serotypes including Bw4 and Bw6, KIR ligands (C1 and C2) and imputed HLA haplotypes51,52.
Subjects were grouped in three categories (Negative: SS_MAX = 0; Mild: SS_MAX = 1 –3; Severe: SS_MAX = 4 −8), and organized in six broad ancestry groups [European (EUR), Hispanic (HIS), Asian (ASI), African American (AFA), Native American (NAM) and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander (HPI)] based on self-reported ethnicity in clinical records.
When self-reported ethnicity was not available, genetic ancestry calculated from the low pass WGS in this study was used as described above.
We converted the genetic ancestry information to self-reported medical record ethnicity format as follows: European and West Asian => EUR; some Indigenous American => HIS; East Asian and South Asian => ASI; African => AFA; fully Indigenous American => NAM; some Oceanian => HPI.
We compared the distribution of both HLA serotypes and alleles from COVID-19+ individuals with low disease severity (maximum severity score 1−3, n = 336) to those with high disease severity (maximum severity score 4-8, n = 94).
HLA serotype and allele frequencies were calculated in both Mild and Severe groups, and Odds Ratio (OR: Mild vs. Severe) and p-values were calculated for each serotype and allele using Bridging ImmunoGenomic Data-Analysis Workflow Gaps (BIGDAWG)53.
Cochran- Mantel-Haenszel (CMH) tests54 were subsequently performed for all observed HLA-A, -B, -C, -DRB1, -DQB1 and -DPB1 serotypes and alleles across three major ethnic groups (EUR, HIS and ASI) using the “mantelhaen.test” function in stats R package.
Subjects with AFA, NAM and HPI ethnic groups were excluded from CMH tests, because we had only 6, 1 and 5 subjects, respectively, that yielded HLA genotypes.
Phylodynamic analysis
For Bayesian inference of the viral phylogeny, we assumed the Extended Bayesian Skyline Plot55 prior on the effective population size and coalescent prior on the phylogeny, a fixed molecular clock with a uniform prior distribution centered at 8 ×
10−4 substitutions per site per year as done in56.
We assumed the HKY mutation model57 with default hyperparameter priors in the BEAST2 software58.
We ran a Markov chain Monte Carlo chain to approximate the posterior distribution of the model parameters for 20 million iterations and thinned every 5000 iterations.
The first 10% of samples were discarded as burn-in.
We used Tracer59 to assess the convergence and confirm that the effective sample size (ESS) was >120 for all parameters (except in 15% of effective population size parameters, estimations not shown).
Finally, we used TreeAnnotator60 to summarize the phylogeny posterior distribution and generated the maximum clade credibility tree of Fig.
1H. To test the association between clade composition and binary traits, we used the R package treeSeg61.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
We simulate the transmission of measles in Virginia in two scenarios—(1) pre-COVID-19 (base-case scenario), and (2) post-lockdowns (i.e. after resuming social activities to pre-covid levels but reduced MMR immunization rate) to quantify the increased risk of measles resurgence post-COVID due to the decline in routine immunizations.
The transmission process is characterized by an agent-based modeling framework implemented on a synthetic yet realistic activity-based social network (discussed below), which has been used in several modeling studies, such as [12,13,14].
The MMR vaccination status of the children in the synthetic population is determined from the school immunization data publicly available from the Virginia Department of Health.
The vaccination status of adults is determined by the state-level immunization rate available from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Figure 1 graphically shows the different components of the model and the methods and the flow of processes between them.
In the following subsections we describe the process used for constructing the synthetic network, the datasets, and the procedure for assigning the immunization status to individuals, the disease transmission model, the interventions, and the experimental parameters.
Fig.
1 Design and flow of the model.
Summary of the design and the flow of the model.
Green hexagon (source for synthetic population), orange hexagons (sources for activity-based contact network) and yellow hexagons (sources for MMR immunization rate) show select sources of input data Full size image
Synthetic population and contact network
The social contact network of the Virginia population consists of more than 7.6 million nodes and 371.9 million edges, and was developed using a “first principles" approach [12, 13, 15, 16].
The nodes represent synthetic individuals with respective households which are located geographically.
Each node is endowed with features like age, race, gender, household size, household location, household income etc., as available in the US Census.
The synthetic population is created by integrating various datasets from commercial and public sources into a common architecture for data exchange.
Each synthetic individual is placed in a household with other synthetic people, and each household is located geographically in such a way that a census of the synthetic population yields results statistically indistinguishable from the original census data, if they are both aggregated to the block group level [17, 18].
Further, counties of Virginia are designated as “urban” or “rural” based on the US Census Urban and Rural Classification [19].
Synthetic individuals are assigned daily activities using time-use surveys (American Time Use Survey data [20], National Household Travel Survey Data
[21] and Multinational Time Use Study
[22]), and then assigned a geo-location for each activity that each person performs.
The geo-locations are based on data from HERE/NAVTEQ,Footnote 1National Center for Education Statistics,Footnote 2LandScan,Footnote 3OpenStreetMapFootnote 4 etc.
Finally, a dynamic social bipartite visitation network is constructed when people visit locations to perform daily activities and come in physical contact with others at those locations.
The colocation based social contact network is used for the spread of disease transmission.
For more details on the social network construction, see [12, 15, 17, 23].
Disease transmission model
We use an agent-based disease transmission model to simulate the spread of measles in the population.
The model computes probabilistic disease transmission between individuals (nodes in the network) as well as keeps track of the disease progression and the different health states of each node, as shown in Fig.
2.
The evolution of the health state of any individual is assumed to follow a network-based SEIR (Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered) model.
Fig.
2 Disease transmission flowchart.
SEIR disease transmission model for measles.
Only susceptible nodes can become exposed and infected.
Exposed is the latent stage of Measles and Infected state comprises of the infectious period (presymptomatic incubation and rash) Full size image
The simulation is initialized by (a) setting the health states of all the immunized nodes as “Vaccinated", (b) selecting a random node from age group 5–17 years as “Infected" (and infectious) to seed the epidemic, and (c) setting all other nodes as “Susceptible".
We assume that the vaccine is perfect, and thus no vaccinated node contracts the disease
[24].
The propensity of transmission, i.e., a susceptible node contracting the disease while in contact with (that is, sharing an edge with) an infectious node, is calculated by summing for all edges of the susceptible node, the product of the contact duration over a day (24 h), susceptibility (\(\upsigma\)) of the susceptible node, infectivity (\(\upiota\)) of a contact node and transmissibility (\(\uptau\)) for each edge.
Thus, if the set of health states is \(\upchi =\{\mathrm{Susceptible},\) \(\mathrm{Exposed},\) \(\mathrm{Infected},\) \(\mathrm{Recovered}\}\), the associated susceptibility and infectivity for a node \(\mathrm{P}\) in the population is denoted by \({\upsigma }_{\mathrm{P}}(\mathrm{X})\) and \({\upiota }_{\mathrm{P}}(\mathrm{X})\) respectively for \(\mathrm{X}\in\upchi\).
We assume that susceptibility of “Susceptible" health state is 1, and 0 for all other health states and infectivity of “Infected" health state is 1, and 0 for all other health states ensuring that only infected nodes can transmit the disease to a susceptible node.
The probability that a susceptible node P becomes exposed by contact with infectious neighbors P’ is a function of the transmissibility \(\uptau\) and the contact duration.
Notice that the Exposed state stands for the latent period and hence not infectious; the Infected state comprises of the pre-symptomatic and the rash period, and is infectious.
Between September 2018 to August 2019, the measles outbreak in New York city (NYC) led to a total of 649 case counts
[2].
Being the latest large outbreak with a population size close to Virginia’s, we chose the transmissibility (\(\uptau\)) value to be 0.5 which on an average, with one node initially infected between the ages 5–17 years, results in an outbreak of the size proportional to the one that occurred in NYC.
Details of the calibration of the parameter \(\uptau\) are described in the Appendix.
Once a node becomes exposed, the disease progresses as follows.
The maximum duration of the latency period is 9 days and follows the discrete probability distribution {0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.6, 1} of the health state of the node changing to infected.
The infectious duration (includes the presymptomatic incubation and the rash periods) of each infected node is then determined by the discrete probability distribution {0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0.3, 0.7, 1} of the node getting recovered [25] as shown in Fig. 2.
Note that, the cumulative probability distribution is reported as {\({\mathrm{p}}_{1},{\mathrm{p}}_{2}\dots ,{\mathrm{p}}_{\mathrm{n}}\)}, where \({\mathrm{p}}_{\mathrm{i}}\) is the probability that \(\mathrm{i}\) is the last day of latency and of infectiousness respectively; and a measles case will change state within \(\mathrm{n}\) days.
We assume that a recovered individual obtains permanent immunity against measles.
This assumption is realistic for the scope of this paper since we simulate the transmission for a relatively short time duration (365 days).
The disease progression related parameters used in the model are described in the Table 1.
Table 1 Table of variables.
Summary of the variables used in the experiments.
†The cumulative probability distribution is reported as { \({\mathrm{p}}_{1},{\mathrm{p}}_{2}\dots ,{\mathrm{p}}_{\mathrm{n}}\) }, where \({\mathrm{p}}_{\mathrm{i}}\) is the probability that \(\mathrm{i}\) is the last day of latency or of infectiousness, and a measles case will change state within \(\mathrm{n}\) days Full size table
In this study, we assume that over the year of simulation there are no new infant nodes due to birth or nodes removed due to mortality.
MMR immunization rates
Children
Immunization rate for children (up to age 17) was calculated using middle school (6th grade) students’ and kindergarten students’ immunization report for Fall 2018 from the Virginia School Immunization Survey (SIS) which is publicly available at the Virginia Department of Health (VDH) website (https://www.vdh.virginia.gov/immunization/sisresultsarchived/) for public schools.
All schools for kindergarten level and schools with less than 10 students for 6th grade level reported only the overall vaccination rate instead of MMR specific immunization rate
[26].
We used MMR vaccination rate in the data whenever available and the overall rate otherwise.
The synthetic population network [13] has a record of all the schools included in the National Center for Education Statistics database (Common Core DataFootnote 5 for public schools).
We assigned the SIS immunization rate for all the schools common to both SIS data and the synthetic population.
Table 2 summarizes the assumptions used for assigning immunization rates to the schools in the synthetic population that were missing in the SIS data.
We use latitude and longitude to find the nearest school by Haversine distance measure.
We assume that if a household has more than one child of age 14 or below, they all have the same immunization status.
The assignment of immunization status is done using a binomial distribution with probability equal to the associated school’s immunization rate (assumptions for different age groups shown in Table 2).
The resulting childhood (ages under 18 years) immunization rate for the Virginia population network is 96.331% whereas the overall vaccination rate in the Virginia population is 91.496%.
Figures in the Appendix show a county-wise spatial distribution of the immunization rates for the synthetic population in Virginia.
Table 2 Immunization rate assumptions.
Assumptions for assigning immunization rates to schools and individuals Full size table
Adults
The National Immunization Survey reports the state level immunization rate of 19–35-month-olds for the years 1995 to 2017.
Since the subjects in the reports from 1995–2004 are adults in the current year (2021), we use a weighted average of the state level aggregated rates from these years [19, 29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38] (from the trend reports which are publicly available at the CDC’s ChildVaxView webpageFootnote 6) to obtain the state level immunization rate to be 90.03%.
We assign these immunization rates to the adults in the population (18 + years age) through uniformly sampling per census block group.
The resultant overall vaccination rate of the synthetic population turns out to be 91.5% (i.e. adults and children) which is used in the base-case scenario.
Interventions
Due to high transmissibility, measles patients are recommended to isolate to prevent secondary infections.
Therefore, in our simulations, the intervention applied to infectious individuals is home isolation.
We assume that, in the base case, 90% of the individuals entering “infectious" class are compliant to home isolation directive [25].
Since the measles’ rash starts around 3–5 days after the non-specific symptoms of fever and cough, we assume that infectious individuals begin home-isolation three days after entering the infectious state (to account for delay in getting a diagnosis and severe symptoms) and continue home isolation for the rest of their infection duration.
Home isolation is implemented in our simulations in the following manner.
At the end of every time step (a day), out of the new “infected" nodes, 90% (referred to as home isolation compliance rate) are randomly selected to initiate home isolation on the third day since becoming “infected" by deactivating all their non-home edges in the network.
That is, isolating individuals will not contact any individuals other than their household members.
Non-home edges are reactivated after the isolating node has recovered to indicate that the activities of that individual have resumed.
Simulations
We use a tool called EpiHiper
[16] to simulate the spread of measles under various scenarios over the social network of Virginia.
It is implemented in C +
+ /MPI and is scalable to millions of agents via its parallel algorithm, which enables scaling on distributed memory systems [16].
EpiHiper is a network-based epidemiological model designed to study the impact of individual behavior and public health policies on the spread of infectious diseases.
Similar methods have been successfully used to study COVID-19 and Influenza and are discussed in detail in [14, 39,40,41].
Each simulation begins with one random infected node of age 5–17 years and is run for 365 time-steps (365 days).
For the base case scenario, we assume that the transmissibility is 0.5, the home isolation compliance rate is 90%
[25] and the home-isolation is initiated three days after entering infectious state.
We study two types of outcomes: (a) the expected number and distribution of cases (since there is significant variance in the number of cases), and (b) the probability of having a large outbreak.
The latter is important, since the expected number of cases is a small fraction due to the relatively high immunization rates in the population, and the high variance in simulation outcomes.
We note that computing the probability of large outbreaks is a rare event, and requires a very large number of simulations to estimate well, which is a novel aspect of our study.
Table 1 lists all the variables and their corresponding values used in the experiments.
The hardware and software requirements for conducting all the simulations are listed in the Appendix.
Effect of lockdown
Rate of routine immunizations is believed to have dropped by as much as 40% in some states in the US during COVID-19 era [5].
Now with the end of the lockdown, an increase in social activities could result in a higher spread of infectious diseases if immunization rates continue to stay low.
To assess the effect of a reduced MMR vaccination rate during the pandemic [42] on measles resurgence, we model the decline in the MMR rate in the population that is 12 years or younger, by a parameter \(\mathrm{\alpha }\) which is chosen to be in the range of 5% to 25%.
These nodes are selected (a) uniformly randomly throughout the network, referred to as the uniform scenario, and (b) (inversely) weighted by their per capita household income (to capture the impact on low-income and vulnerable population), referred to as the weighted scenario.
Note that the former scenario assumes the decline in vaccination to be proportional to the population density whereas the latter assumes the decline to be negatively correlated to household income to capture the lack of access to health care services for the lower income households.
The resulting immunization rate distributions for the post-COVID scenarios, i.e. for α > 0 both uniform and weighted, are shown by county in figures in the Appendix.
Effect of the rural–urban divide
In Virginia, there are approximately thrice as many individuals residing in the urban counties as in rural counties, and urban residents have, on average, about 1.5 times the per capita household income of the rural residents.
We study the distributions of the outbreak size when the source of the outbreak is in an urban county versus in a rural county.
We analyze the differences in the distributions for various values of \(\mathrm{\alpha }\)
(decrease in immunization rate) in the two types of regions.
Effect of interventions
The goal of public health interventions is to prevent the spread of the disease.
Since the exact values for home-isolation compliance rate, initiation of home-isolation and transmissibility are unknown, we analyze the sensitivity of our outcomes to these parameters.
Specifically, we analyze the risk of measles outbreak if.
1.
the transmissibility varies between 0.5–0.9. 2.
the rate of compliance to home isolation varies between 75–95%.
3.
the delay in initiation of home isolation varies between 3–7 days.
Vulnerable population groups
We define vulnerability as the risk of getting infected in the simulations.
To identify groups of people who may be more vulnerable to measles, and disproportionately so than the rest of the population, we chart the distributions of the proportion of infected population by race, age group, ethnicity, household size and household income.
Since none of the distributions are normal, we choose to perform a non-parametric Wilcoxon’s Signed Rank Test to see which groups of people (variables) are significantly more or less vulnerable to measles in three scenarios: the base case and the cases of 25% (uniform and weighted) decline in childhood MMR immunization rate.
To quantify the magnitude of the effect of the variables on vulnerability, through the Wilcoxon test, we calculate the effect size corresponding to each variable tested by dividing the absolute (positive) standardized test statistic z by the square root of the sample size.
Based on Cohen’s classification for effect sizes [43], we assume a value around 0.2 denotes small effect, around 0.5 a medium effect and around 0.8 a large effect [44].
Español
UPDATE: On May 25, 2023, the FDA classified this recall as a Class I recall, the most serious type of recall.
Date Issued: May 4, 2023
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is warning consumers and health care providers to stop using and throw out certain lots of recalled SD Biosensor, Inc.
Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Tests, distributed by Roche Diagnostics.
The FDA has significant concerns of bacterial contamination in the Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test liquid solution, provided in the test kit.
Direct contact with the contaminated liquid solution may pose safety concerns and the bacterial contamination could impact the performance of the test.
SD Biosensor, Inc. has initiated a recall for all impacted SD Biosensor Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Tests that were distributed by Roche Diagnostics to certain retailers in the United States.
Approximately 500,000 tests were distributed to CVS Health, as well as about 16,000 tests to Amazon.
The FDA is working with Roche Diagnostics to understand how many of those tests were sold to consumers.
Importantly, none of the impacted lots were distributed through COVID.gov/tests - Free at-home COVID-19 tests or as part of other federal testing programs.
If you received your tests through the COVID.gov/tests distribution or as part of other federal testing programs, they are not subject to this safety communication or product recall.
The FDA is advising consumers to stop using and throw out Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test kits with the following lot numbers:
53K38N1T1 53K4221T1 53K4292T1 53K38N2T1 53K4222T1 53K42A1T1 53K38N3T1 53K4223T1
53K42A2T1 53K38N4T1
53K4224T1 53K42A3T1
53K38N5T1 53K4225T1 53K42E1T1 53K38P1T1 53K4231T1 53K42G1T1 53K38P2T1 53K4232T1 53K42G2T1 53K38P3T1 53K4233T1
53K42H1T1 53K41T5T1 53K4261T1 53K42H2T1 53K41X1T1 53K4262T1
53K42L1T1 53K41X2T 53K4271T1
53K42L2T1 53K41X3T1 53K4272T1
53K4361AC 53K4211T1 53K4273T1 53K4362AC 53K4212T1
53K4274T1 53K4392AC 53K4213T1 53K4291T1
Recommendations for Consumers, Test Users, and Caregivers
Check to see if your SD Biosensor Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test is included in the SD Biosensors product recall by comparing the lot number.
Do not use test kits with the affected lot numbers listed above.
Throw out the entire test kit in the household trash.
Do not pour the liquid solution down the drain.
Additional information can be found in the Quick Reference Instructions for patients.
If the liquid in the tube contacts your skin and eyes, flush with large amounts of water.
If irritation persists, seek medical attention.
Watch for signs of bacterial infection caused by exposure to the contaminated liquid solution.
If you see signs of infection, such as fever, discharge, red eyes, or any other concerning symptoms, seek medical attention.
Talk to your health care provider if you think you were tested with an affected Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test, or if you have concerns about your test results.
Recommendations for Health Care Providers and Testing Program Organizers
If an antigen test was performed less than two weeks ago using the Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test, consider retesting your patients using an FDA authorized or cleared SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic test if you suspect an inaccurate result.
If testing was performed more than two weeks ago and there is no reason to suspect current SARS-CoV-2 infection, it is not necessary to retest.
If a patient presents with signs of bacterial infection, such as fever, conjunctivitis, or other signs or symptoms of systemic infection, consider whether they have recently used a Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test.
If they have, consider whether their infection may be from exposure to the contaminated buffer solution.
Report any problems you experience with the Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test to the FDA, including suspected false results.
See Reporting Problems with Your Test.
Potential Risks
The liquid solution provided in the affected Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test kits has been found to be contaminated with organisms such as Enterococcus, Enterobacter, Klebsiella and Serratia species.
Individuals performing the self-test may run the risk of direct contact with the contaminated liquid in the tube.
The liquid is contained in an individual, ready-to-use, pre-filled and sealed tube, but a user may inadvertently come in direct contact with contaminated liquid buffer during opening the tube or handling of the open tube or while performing the test.
Infection from bacteria such as Enterococcus, Enterobacter, Klebsiella and Serratia species may cause illness in people with weakened immune systems or those with direct exposure to the contaminated liquid solution through standard handling, accidental spills, or misuse of the product.
In addition to the risk of infection, this contamination may impact the performance of the test, and false results may occur.
A false-negative antigen test result means that the test says the person does not have COVID-19 but they actually do have COVID-19.
A false-negative result may lead to delayed diagnosis or inappropriate treatment of SARS-CoV-2, which may cause people harm including serious illness and death.
False-negative results can also lead to further spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, including when people are housed together in health care, long-term care, and other facilities due to these false test results.
When false negative test results are received, actions to limit exposure to an infected person might not be taken, such as isolating people, limiting contact with family and friends, or limiting access to places of employment.
means that the test says the person does not have COVID-19
but they actually do have COVID-19.
A false-negative result may lead to delayed diagnosis or inappropriate treatment of SARS-CoV-2, which may cause people harm including serious illness and death.
False-negative results can also lead to further spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, including when people are housed together in health care, long-term care, and other facilities due to these false test results.
When false negative test results are received, actions to limit exposure to an infected person might not be taken, such as isolating people, limiting contact with family and friends, or limiting access to places of employment.
A false-positive antigen test result means that the test says the person has COVID-19
but they actually do not have COVID-19.
A false-positive result may lead to a delay in both the correct diagnosis and appropriate treatment for the actual cause of a person's illness, which could be another life-threatening disease that is not COVID-19.
False-positive results could also lead to further spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus when presumed positive people are housed together.
The FDA has not received reports of injuries, adverse health consequences, or death associated with use of the SD Biosensor Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test to date.
Test Description
The SD Biosensor Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test is a lateral flow immunoassay device intended for the qualitative detection of the nucleocapsid protein antigen found in the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
This test is authorized for non-prescription home use, self-collected anterior nasal (nares) swab samples from individuals aged 14 years or older, or adult collected anterior nasal (nares) swab samples from individuals aged 2 years or older.
FDA Actions
The FDA has classified the recall for these tests as a Class I recall, the most serious type of recall.
The FDA is continuing to work with SD Biosensor Inc. to assess the company’s corrective actions to address the reason for bacterial contamination and help ensure the situation is resolved and will not return.
The FDA will continue to keep the public informed of significant new information.
Reporting Problems with Your Device
If you think you had a problem with the SD Biosensor Pilot COVID-19 At-Home Test, the FDA encourages you to report the problem through the MedWatch Voluntary Reporting Form.
Generally, as specified in a test's Emergency Use Authorization, device manufacturers must comply with the applicable Medical Device Reporting (MDR) regulations.
Questions?
If you have questions, email the Division of Industry and Consumer Education (DICE) at DICE@FDA.HHS.GOV or call 800-638-2041 or 301-796-7100.
Additional Resources
U.S. Senators Josh Hawley (R-Mo.) and Mike Braun (R-Ind.) have sent a letter to President Biden demanding he implement the COVID-19 Origin Act of 2023, and declassify and release all information related to the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic.
"We introduced the COVID-19 Origin Act of 2023 earlier this Congress to hold China accountable for its obfuscation during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic," wrote the Senators.
"The American people deserve to know how this pandemic began, and their democratically elected representatives have expressed their will unanimously.
"
In March, Senator Hawley's COVID-19 Origin Act of 2023 was signed into law by President Biden.
The legislation requires the Biden administration to declassify intelligence related to any potential links between the Wuhan Institute of Virology and the origins of the Covid pandemic.
Read the full letter here or below.
June 14, 2023
The Honorable Joseph R. Biden
President of the United States
The White House
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20500
Dear President Biden:
We write today to urge the swift and complete implementation of the COVID-19 Origin Act of 2023, which Congress unanimously passed, and which you signed into law on March 20, 2023.
As you know, the COVID-19 Origin Act of 2023 requires the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) to “declassify any and all information” relating to links between the Wuhan Institute of Virology and the origin of COVID-19 within 90 days of the law’s enactment.
That deadline, June 18, 2023, is fast approaching.
Your Administration has not yet provided any indication of when the relevant material will be declassified.
Importantly, the Act further requires the Director to transmit “all of the information” to Congress, with one very narrow exception.
The Act does not allow for redactions based on your Administration’s view of “national security” broadly defined, as you claimed in your signing statement.
Rather, the Act only provides for much narrower redactions to protect intelligence sources and methods.
Your Administration should comply with the law as written and not undermine clear congressional intent to provide as much transparency to the American people as possible.
We introduced the COVID-19 Origin Act of 2023 earlier this Congress to hold China accountable for its obfuscation during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic.
From the beginning of the pandemic, China appears to have taken every effort to hide COVID’s origins from the world.
The American people deserve to know how this pandemic began, and their democratically elected representatives have expressed their will unanimously.
We urge you not to stand in their way.
Sincerely,
Josh Hawley Mike Braun
United States Senator United States Senator
Kate Clancy, a biological anthropologist and professor at the University of Illinois, is the author of “ Period: The Real Story of Menstruation ,” from which this op-ed is adapted.
One day in early 2021, Katie Lee, a former student of mine who is now a professor at Tulane University, sent a message asking if I’d heard anything about heavier or breakthrough bleeding with the coronavirus vaccines.
I hadn’t, and put her message out of my mind.
Two weeks later, I received my first dose, and soon afterward I got my period.
I bled so heavily that I was swapping out overnight-strength pads every hour.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a severe impact on the mental health and wellbeing of people around the world.
It has also disrupted access to mental health services and raised concerns about increases in suicidal behaviour.
Indigenous and afro descendant populations in the Region of the Americas have been historically subjected to systemic economic and social inequities.
Access to essential healthcare services may have decreased as a result of the pandemic, exposing these communities to higher risk of contracting COVID-19 and not receiving appropriate care.
The result is an increased psychosocial vulnerability, with indigenous youth being at particularly higher risk.
This project is a collaborative initiative between the Pan American Health Organization/World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) and the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), and was funded by PHAC.
It aims to support and strengthen government and community Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS) responses to minimize suffering and improve mental health and psychosocial wellbeing of Indigenous and afro-descendant populations affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Each of the countries who participated were impacted by the pandemic in different ways and their indigenous and afro descendant populations resorted to different coping mechanisms in response to it.
The World Health Organization’s vaccine advisory group on Tuesday announced updates to its COVID-19 guidance, recommending additional booster shots at six months after the last shot for some, depending on age and immunocompromising conditions.
Populations considered to be “high priority” for COVID-19 vaccination include older adults, younger adults with significant medical conditions, immunocompromised people, pregnant women and front-line workers.
For this group, the experts recommend an additional booster shot at six months or annually “with the timeframe depending on factors such as age and immunocompromising conditions.”
The “medium priority” group includes healthy adults as well as children and adolescents with medical conditions.
While additional booster shots for this population are safe, the vaccine advisory group does not recommend routine COVID-19 booster shots beyond the first booster dose “given the comparatively low public health returns.
”
Healthy children and adolescents ages 6 months to 17 years are considered the “low priority” group.
The advisers left the door open for countries to make the determination of whether to vaccinate this group against COVID-19.
The group said that while primary vaccination and booster doses are safe for this group, countries should decide on the shots based on several factors, including disease burden, cost effectiveness, other health priorities and opportunity costs.
Political Cartoons View All 253 Images
“The public health impact of vaccinating healthy children and adolescents is comparatively much lower than the established benefits of traditional essential vaccines for children – such as the rotavirus, measles, and pneumococcal conjugate vaccines – and of COVID-19 vaccines for high and medium priority groups,” WHO said in a press release on the updated guidance.
“Children with immunocompromising conditions and comorbidities do face a higher risk of severe COVID-19, so are included in the high and medium priority groups respectively.”
The guidance only applies to the current global situation with COVID-19, so the additional booster recommendations for some “should not be seen as for continued annual COVID-19 vaccine boosters.”
Instead, the goal is to advise countries for the near future.
The updated recommendations come as places such as Canada and the United Kingdom already recommended another COVID-19 booster shot in the spring for people at high risk for severe disease.
The U.S. is also reportedly considering authorizing a second omicron-specific booster shot for people aged 65 and older or who have weakened immune systems.
Additionally, U.S. health officials have proposed a booster shot strategy similar to the flu vaccine schedule, with an updated shot matched to circulating strains offered annually in the fall for most Americans.
WHO’s vaccine advisers said during a press briefing on Tuesday that their guidance is meant to be broad and that certain countries may deviate from it.
The organization has long advocated for an equitable global distribution of vaccines, calling on developed countries to share doses with areas where people have largely gone without the shot before recommending additional boosters.
I am on a mission to preserve the most valuable item in my home: my fiancé, who has never had COVID.
Through sheer luck and a healthy dose of terror, he made it through the first pandemic year without getting sick.
Shielded by the J&J vaccine and a Moderna booster, he dodged infection when I fell ill last November and coughed up the coronavirus all over our cramped New York City apartment.
Somehow, he ducked the Omicron wave over the winter, when it seemed as though everyone was getting sick.
And in the past few months, he has emerged unscathed from crowded weddings, indoor dinners, and flights across the country.
At this point, I worry about how much longer it’s going to last.
People like him—I think of them as “COVID virgins”—are becoming a rare breed.
Just yesterday, President Joe Biden thinned their ranks by one more person.
The Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation suggests that as of earlier this month, 82 percent of Americans have been infected with the coronavirus at least once.
Some of those people might still think they’re never had the virus: Asymptomatic infections happen, and mild symptoms are sometimes brushed off as allergies or a cold.
Now that we’re battling BA.5, the most contagious and vaccine-dodging Omicron offshoot yet, many people are facing their second, third, or even fourth infections.
That reality can make it feel like the stragglers who have evaded infection for two and a half years are destined to fall sick sooner rather than later.
At this point, are COVID virgins nothing more than sitting ducks?
Read: Of course Biden has COVID
The basic math admittedly doesn’t look promising.
Most of the people getting infected right now seem to be coming down with the illness for the first time, even though they are a distinct minority.
Nationally, we don’t have good data on who is getting COVID, though in New York, first infections seem to be happening at five times the rate of reinfections.
Part of why those who haven’t gotten COVID seem to be at a higher risk of infection is that taking into account all other factors—vaccination, age, behaviors—they lack the immunity bump conferred by a bout with the virus, no matter how fleeting that bump may be.
On its own, this would suggest that these people are in fact sitting ducks who can’t avoid infection short of hunkering down in total isolation.
The experts I talked with agreed that the risk of infection is currently high.
“We are finding now that with the more transmissible variants, it’s becoming more and more difficult to avoid infections,” Robert Kim-Farley, an epidemiologist at UCLA, told me.
“However, it’s not inevitable.”
Rick Bright, the CEO of the Rockefeller Foundation’s Pandemic Prevention Institute, was less certain.
“Honestly, it might be inevitable, the way the virus has continued to change,” he said.
Still, they reiterated that we still don’t quite know just how at risk those who haven’t had COVID are—especially when BA.5 seems to be reinfecting so many people.
“I don’t know if I would call them sitting ducks, necessarily,” Bright said, “but I would say every one of us is more vulnerable.”
The unvaccinated are still the most vulnerable by far, especially to more severe outcomes.
But even this far into the pandemic, it’s hard to know exactly why some vaccinated and boosted people have gotten sick while others haven’t—good pandemic behaviors might come into play, along with luck.
Scientists are still investigating the role of other factors, including whether genetics might be protecting the immune systems of people who haven’t gotten COVID.
Read: Is BA.5 the ‘reinfection wave’?
Nevertheless, all of the experts argued that COVID virgins should still try to avoid infection.
Above all, they should get up-to-date on vaccination and boosters.
Once those layers of protection are in place, they should continue to be prudent—especially in crowded, indoor settings—but unless they are medically vulnerable, they don’t have to take more precautions than anyone else, Kim-Farley said.
The guidance for this group is the same as it is for everybody else largely because immunity by infection is protective, but only to an extent.
BA.5, for one, seems to be able to reinfect people who were previously sick, sometimes even those who just a few months ago had an earlier version of Omicron.
At this point, an infection from a year ago, let alone two, might not mean much immunologically.
“People shouldn’t rely on prior infection, because it just is not as effective as prior vaccination,” Kim-Farley said.
And though “hybrid immunity”—which results when a person gets sick and is then vaccinated, or vice versa—is thought to confer a good amount of protection, “that kind of assertion may be challenged” now that so many reinfections are occurring, the Yale epidemiologist Albert Ko told me.
The ultimate problem with people viewing themselves as sitting ducks is that this is the exact attitude epidemiologists do not want us to have.
It can foster a “why bother?” demeanor, negating all public-health efforts to stop transmission and discouraging personal efforts to protect oneself.
In other words, it promotes COVID fatalism, which is appealing because it offers relief from the daily anxiety and behavioral compromises of pandemic life by assuming that an infection is a question of when, not if.
This notion can be liberating for those who have never gotten infected—and presumably it is part of the reason so few are left: Many people have already adopted a “meh” attitude toward COVID, not letting the fear of an infection get in the way of living their lives.
Even this late in the game, you should really try to avoid getting COVID if you can.
Having to take precautions can be frustrating after so many months of pandemic life, but getting sick can be extremely unpleasant, even if you are vaccinated and boosted.
There’s the risk of long COVID, yes, but those who escape it can still feel terrible for several days, if not weeks, Bright said.
These infections don’t usually lead to hospitalization or death, but they’re no walk in the park either, especially for the elderly and the immunocompromised.
And as COVID continues to mutate, you definitely want to forestall a second infection, or a third down the line.
The consequences of repeated infections and their potential to cause long COVID or other health issues are not yet known.
And, of course, the tenets of COVID 101 are still true: Even if your infection is mild, you can still spread it to someone who could have it much worse.
The grim reality is that as long as the virus shows no signs of abating, the number of COVID virgins will continue to shrink.
Grappling with this reality will be a lot less stressful if we reframe the way we talk about getting COVID.
Instead of fretting about the virus as something that could come for you, focus on what to do when it does.
Those who are vaccinated and boosted may still be ducks sitting in the crosshairs of infection, but in all likelihood they won’t die or get severely ill, especially if they are young and healthy.
“That’s what we care most about,” Ko said.
The people who haven’t gotten sick should remember that they have already won—vaccines, in tandem with the treatments that are now available, mean that it’s far better to get sick now than it was a year or two ago.
When I told my fiancé that he would probably get COVID but should definitely still try not to get COVID, he described the situation as “Kafkaesque.”
Indeed, these are absurd and illogical times.
But at the very least, focusing on what is within our control can help us regain a modicum of sense.
Short of total isolation, people may not be able to do much to avoid the coronavirus forever, but there’s still plenty they can do to escape the worst when it does come for them.
When looking at the state of COVID-19 in the United States, Mansoor Amiji, distinguished professor in the Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences at Northeastern, invites you to think from the perspective of a virus.
What does it want?
What does it need to do to find new hosts, or to reinfect old ones?
The answer, he says, lies in spike proteins, the part of a virus that attaches to the receptor on a host cell.
Under pressure from natural immunity and other countermeasures to its survival, the COVID-19 virus mutates these spike proteins at random, creating new variants that are more transmissible than previous ones.
This evolution makes COVID-19 similar to other viruses we’ve seen.
“That’s really the natural course of a virus,” Amiji says.
It’s also the reason you’re more likely to get COVID-19 twice now than you were just four months ago.
New variants like BA-4 or BA-5, which were unheard of earlier this year, are now circulating in the United States, and they may not be prevented by vaccines, boosters, or the antibodies that you develop when you’re infected by another variant.
For example, if you became infected from the BA-2 subvariant, this doesn’t prevent you from getting infected with BA-4 or BA-5, says Neil Maniar, professor of practice in the Department of Health Sciences.
Maniar says each subvariant of COVID-19 tends to be more transmissible than the last, and that protection from one does not guarantee protection from another.
“It doesn’t mean that we have to fear reinfection,” Maniar says, “but it does mean we have to keep in mind that just because you got COVID once, it doesn’t mean you won’t get it again within a month or two months or three months, because there are these different subvariants that are circulating.”
Despite this development, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention still does not recommend that you test for COVID-19 within 90 days of recovering from infection.
“If you tested positive for COVID-19 with a viral test within the previous 90 days and subsequently recovered and remain asymptomatic, you do not need to quarantine or get tested after close contact,” reads the CDC’s website.
The reason for this, Maniar says, is that a PCR test can still detect trace amounts of the virus even after someone is no longer symptomatic or infectious.
This can lead to a false positive, even when an antigen (or, “rapid”) test will come back negative.
“Those viral particles can be detected as far as two or three months out,” he says.
The thinking when the recommendation was written was also that the antibodies developed during the infection could protect you from getting reinfected within 90 days.
But that’s not really the case, Maniar says.
“The idea that if you are infected, that you don’t necessarily have to worry about reinfection for three months, doesn’t necessarily apply anymore,” he says.
The return to the “new normal”—maskless workspaces and airplanes, for example—may increase the probability of reinfections from different variants.
“We’re really starting to return to a much more normal pace of life relative to earlier this year,” Maniar says.
“That’s a really good thing.”
It means that we have resources at our disposal, like vaccines and masks, to gather in relative safety, he says.
Still, “the likelihood of being exposed increases.”
Fortunately, as variants tend to become more infectious, they also tend to become less powerful.
Amiji says COVID-19’s subvariants typically cause more upper respiratory issues than lower, making the symptoms less serious.
And for those who have been vaccinated and received booster shots, symptoms tend to be even less severe, or even nonexistent.
This reinforces the importance of getting vaccinated and boosted.
Amiji hopes that one day COVID-19 boosters will combine with flu shots, and that it can be easy to get both at the same time each year.
But hospitalizations still happen, especially among subsets of the population that are at higher risk, so it is still important to take preventative measures even as we start to move into what Amiji calls an “endemic” phase of the pandemic.
To help stop the spread, Amiji recommends getting tested if you have symptoms, and if a rapid test—which is less sensitive than a PCR test—is positive, you should isolate and wear a mask indoors.
The amount of time it takes to test negative after being infected varies from person to person, he says, but it’s important to keep testing in order to make informed decisions.
“It’s the time when you start to test negative that you could potentially be less infective,” he says.
Maniar compares measures like these to wearing a seatbelt every time you get in a car.
“We all do need to continue to think about others around us, and think about what we need to do to protect ourselves.”
For media inquiries, please contact media@northeastern.edu.
Kelly, a 39-year-old self-proclaimed industrial hygienist with master’s degrees in health from an online college, was given the position Tuesday during an Ottawa County Board of Commissioners meeting.
The board — dominated by conservative upstarts backed by activist group Ottawa Impact — voted to hire him as part of an aggressive overhaul of county government.
Related:
But Kelly has a history of promoting unfounded theories about COVID-19.
And that has raised questions about his qualifications as county health officer.
“He’s not based in reality,” said Dr. Rob Davidson, an Ottawa County resident, emergency physician and executive director of the doctors group Committee to Protect Health Care.
Davidson unsuccessfully ran for Congress as a Democrat in 2018.
“When we put someone like that in a position of power, it just completely undermines the whole practice of public health, and it makes the whole county look like fools.”
Commissioners also eliminated the county’s diversity training office on Tuesday and ousted the county’s in-house corporation counsel and administrator, replacing them with a conservative law firm and John Gibbs, an unsuccessful congressional candidate who had been backed by former President Donald Trump.
The board acted with little public notice Tuesday, amending a seemingly innocuous agenda to make sweeping changes, including demotion of current health officer Adeline Hambley to an interim position until Kelly’s appointment is confirmed by the state.
The actions sparked an “extensive review” from Michigan Attorney General Dana Nessel’s office, Nessel spokesperson Kimberly Bush confirmed to Bridge.
Nessel may be looking at whether the board complied with the state Open Meetings Act, which requires public entities to post the meeting agendas in advance and forbids meetings of a majority of members on policy matters.
The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services will review Kelly's resume and transcripts but has not yet received any evidence of his qualifications from the county, spokesperson Lynn Sutfin told Bridge Michigan.
She did not respond to questions about Kelly's past COVID comments, and it's not clear if the state can even consider them in determining his qualifications.
State rules require that Kelly have a masters degree in public health and at least three years of full-time public health administrative experience, which critics say is debatable given his largely private-sector experience.
If Kelly is confirmed, the county must also select a medical director with a medical degree to work with him under state law.
Kelly did not return a Bridge email for comment.
Joe Moss, co-founder of Ottawa Impact and chair of the county’s board of commissioners, could not be reached on Wednesday.
In November 2021, during the height of the pandemic, Kelly dressed in a parody video as Whitmer’s sign language interpreter during a press conference earlier in the pandemic, when she told sports fans stadiums would be shut down.
In the video, he could be seen with makeup on, miming gunshots to his head and suggesting those who took vaccine shots could fall ill or die.
During the Tuesday meeting, Kelly thanked the board for his appointment and pledged he will run the county health department free of “political bias.”
“I look forward to bringing the health department into a fold where we run on completely facts and technology-driven data.”
But in reality, Kelly’s past claims about COVID-19 are anything but.
Unproven COVID-19 claims
Kelly has master degrees of science in public health and occupational health from Columbia Southern University, Ottawa County Commissioner Allison Miedema, who was elected in November with support from Ottawa Impact, said Tuesday.
The institution is an online college based in Orange Beach, Alabama.
Those credentials can invite challenges, Kelly acknowledged in August during the America's Frontline Industrial Hygienists & Multidisciplinary Support Summit, an anti-COVID-19 regulations conference held and attended by conservatives.
Kaiser Permanente research examined role of vaccination in deaths during delta surge
COVID-19 patients in Kaiser Permanente Northern California hospitals during the delta surge of 2021 were less likely to die in the hospital of COVID-19 if they were vaccinated, new research finds.
The study was published in the Journal of Internal Medicine.
“We wanted to learn more about what happened to fully vaccinated patients with breakthrough infections and how their outcomes compared to those of unvaccinated patients,” said lead author Laura Myers, MD, MPH, a research scientist with the Kaiser Permanente Division of Research and practicing intensivist with The Permanente Medical Group.
“These findings suggest that COVID-19 vaccines were protective against in-hospital mortality during the delta wave.”
The study examined 7,305 hospitalized patients with confirmed COVID-19 who required supplemental oxygen between April 1 and November 30, 2021.
Of these, 78% were unvaccinated, 20% were fully vaccinated, 2% were partially vaccinated.
Fully vaccinated patients were older and had a higher severity of illness at admission.
Fully vaccinated patients also had greater comorbidity burden (49% had diabetes, for example).
To address these differences between the groups, the researchers matched 1,463 fully vaccinated patients with 1,463 unvaccinated patients on age, sex, comorbidity burden, diabetes, and hypertension to generate comparable groups and understand the effect of vaccination.
They were able to create 2 similar groups, though the fully vaccinated group of matched patients had a higher comorbidity burden.
Nevertheless, the fully vaccinated patients were less likely to die as an inpatient (9%) compared to the unvaccinated group (16.3%) and less likely to need intensive care (16.1% vs. 21.4%).
Fully vaccinated patients also had a shorter length of stay in the hospital (5 days vs. 6 days).
The groups were equally likely to receive hospice referral (4.4% vs. 4.5%).
The results are encouraging, the authors said, because vaccination provided protection against death even when comparing vaccinated patients with more comorbid factors to unvaccinated patients with less of a comorbidity burden.
“It is important to study specific outcomes, such as mortality, to best evaluate effectiveness of vaccines and their role in combating a pandemic,” said co-author Nicola Klein, MD, PhD, director of the Kaiser Permanente Vaccine Study Center.
“These findings are consistent with other research – including evaluations of mRNA vaccine effectiveness the Vaccine Study Center participated in – showing protection against real-world outcomes.
This is particularly important for patients whose other health conditions may put them at greater risk.”
The study focused on a period of time when the delta variant was predominant, and the omicron variant behaves differently.
Further research is needed to study the effect of vaccination on risk of death as new viral variants arise, Myers said.
Other co-authors were Vincent Liu, MD, MS, Patricia Kipnis, PhD, John Greene, MA, Brian Lawson, PhD, Gabriel J. Escobar, MD, Bruce H. Fireman, MA, all of the Division of Research.
# # #
About the Kaiser Permanente Division of Research
The Kaiser Permanente Division of Research conducts, publishes and disseminates epidemiologic and health services research to improve the health and medical care of Kaiser Permanente members and society at large.
It seeks to understand the determinants of illness and well-being, and to improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of health care.
Currently, DOR’s 600-plus staff is working on more than 450 epidemiological and health services research projects.
For more information, visit divisionofresearch.kaiserpermanente.org or follow us @KPDOR.
Note: This article was originally published in September 2021.
As more robust new studies have come out, and we've continued to learn more, it has been updated in November 2021, February 2022 and April 2023.
The pandemic has taught us many things, and as it has evolved, researchers have also learned more about how the immune system responds to disease and vaccines.
The immunity question is important, especially in light of the immune evasiveness of omicron subvariants and potential future variants.
Which immunity is better: Disease-induced immunity or vaccination-induced immunity?
It turns out it’s not an either-or situation.
Limitations exist with gaining immunity either way – by getting infected by the virus (disease induced) and by getting vaccinated.
Previous research indicated that disease-induced immunity wasn’t necessarily better and that vaccines created more effective and longer-lasting immunity than natural immunity.
Disease-induced immunity, specifically, can be spotty and appears to be somewhat related to how severe the illness was (more severely ill persons appear to have a greater immune response than those with very mild illness or asymptomatic infection).
Some people may have a good antibody response, while others don’t get much of any response.
The additional benefit of vaccine-induced immunity?
Fewer downsides.
Both immunity types start to wane within 60 to 90 days, depending on how your body reacts
Getting the virus comes with more risks, including the potential to develop severe illness, long-COVID or death
Vaccination helps protect against the most serious risks.
“Yes, the vaccine has a few rare serious adverse events associated with it,” says infectious diseases expert Mark Rupp, MD.
“However, the risk of adverse events is much lower than the substantial risks of serious infection and the risk of long-COVID that you get with the disease.
”
Studies now show that both types of immunity are beneficial.
“Recent data analyses indicate that disease-induced immunity can be as long-lasting or even longer-lasting in some instances than vaccine-induced immunity,” adds Dr. Rupp.
“Both appear to do a pretty good job protecting from severe illness and death.”
The best protection against severe outcomes: Hybrid immunity
Hybrid immunity = natural immunity + vaccination
According to an analysis published in The Lancet Infectious Diseases, a recent, robust study shows that hybrid immunity is longer lasting and more effective than disease-induced immunity or vaccination alone.
The analysis reviewed 26 studies that examined protection against reinfection, hospitalization and severe disease caused by omicron.
The findings indicated:
The effectiveness of previous infection against hospital admission or severe illness at 12 months was 74%, with effectiveness against reinfection waning to 24%
For hybrid immunity, protection against hospital admission or severe disease was 97% at 12 months with primary series vaccination and 95% at six months with the first booster shot.
Effectiveness against reinfection waned to 41% at 12 months and to 46% following the first booster shot at six months
In other words, people in the study with hybrid immunity had the highest magnitude and durability of protection, whether they received the partial primary vaccine series, the complete vaccine series, or the first booster shot.
“Despite having a very successful subvariant of omicron (XBB1.5), we’ve not seen a big spike in hospitalization or death (as was seen with delta or omicron),” says Dr. Rupp.
“This is good news for the human population!
As we’ve gained more and more immunologic experience, we are seeing fewer persons get seriously ill.”
The bottom line: If you’ve had COVID-19, don’t miss out on the more robust immunity you will establish by getting a vaccine booster a few months after infection.
COVID-19 continues to have an impact
The risk of COVID-19 infection has not disappeared.
Continue to stay alert and incorporate healthy practices in your daily life.
Approximately 300 people still die from COVID-19 each day in the United States.
“We should not let down our guard yet,” adds Dr. Rupp.
“If you are at higher risk for more serious illness, keep up to date with vaccine boosters and take a few steps to minimize your risk.”
Study findings indicate that the protection offered by a previous infection does not abolish the need for vaccination.
Infection-induced immunity wanes rapidly, and vaccination increases the durability of protection.
NYC’s covid measures for the 2022-23 school year: No more on-site testing.
At-home kits will continue to be sent home.
Masking will mostly be optional.
Students can return, masked, on Day 6 after testing positive.
New York City schools will shed many of its COVID prevention strategies from the past two years, according to new education department guidance posted Tuesday for the 2022-23 school year.
When the nation’s largest school system starts on Sept. 8, students will no longer be required to fill out a daily health screener to enter the building.
Schools will no longer swab a portion of students and staff for COVID, as Chalkbeat reported earlier this month.
But they’ll continue giving out at-home tests.
Masking will continue to be optional but will be required for students and staff who return to school five days after testing positive for COVID.
And, while vaccines will still be required for staff and visitors, they won’t be mandated for students unless they are participating in sports or extracurriculars.
Here’s what we know about COVID guidance for next year:
What happens if I have COVID?
In line with guidance from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, students and staff must stay home for five days after testing positive.
They can return to school on Day 6 if they have no symptoms, or if their symptoms are improving.
They must wear masks through Day 10, following the day they developed symptoms or after their positive COVID test, whichever happened first.
Families are urged to notify their school of positive test results, and the education department’s Situation Room — which handles communications over positive COVID results — is supposed to help the school notify people who have been exposed.
If you’ve been exposed to an infected person, the education department recommends taking an at-home test on the fourth and fifth day — at least 24 hours apart — post-exposure.
If you have COVID symptoms, you should not come to school and should get tested.
Will we still get tested in school for COVID?
No.
The city is ending its in-school PCR testing program, in line with CDC guidelines.
However, the CDC says schools could consider testing students and staff who participate in high-risk activities, such as band or sports, as well as students who are at high risk of severe illness, if COVID levels are high around the community.
That doesn’t appear to be the plan in New York City, at least for now.
What about at-home kits?
Schools will continue to send home kits to students who are potentially exposed to someone with COVID in class.
Additionally, all students and staffers will receive four at-home tests a month for families to use when symptoms arise or after high-risk activities such as travel or large gatherings.
Do I have to be vaccinated to attend school?
Like last year, staff and visitors to school buildings must show proof of vaccination against COVID.
(A spokesperson did not immediately say whether booster shots would be required.)
Vaccination for students won’t be required, unless they participate in sports or extracurriculars where there is a high risk of contracting COVID.
Still, city officials are recommending that everyone be vaccinated against COVID.
Mayor Eric Adams had shown early interest in requiring schoolchildren to be fully vaccinated against COVID.
However, he then moved to loosen restrictions, lifting vaccine mandates for performers and athletes, as well as such requirements for students attending prom at the end of last school year.
Will I have to wear a mask in school?
In places with a high COVID transmission, such as New York City as of Aug. 16, the CDC recommends masking.
Despite that, masking will mostly be optional for students and staff, though officials said face coverings are “strongly recommended” while indoors, especially for those who are immunocompromised.
Again, masking will be required for students who return to school on Day 6 after testing positive for COVID-19 or the onset of symptoms, through Day 10.
Masks will also be required for people with COVID symptoms while at school, as well as those entering their school nurse’s office or school-based health center.
What about ventilation?
City officials say each classroom will have at least two air purifiers.
New York City officials recently spent $27 million on new air filters for classroom air purifiers.
Those purifiers, from a brand called Intellipure, have come under intense scrutiny.
Experts previously told Chalkbeat that while these purifiers are better than having nothing, they’re not as efficient at cleaning air as other brands.
Reema Amin is a reporter covering New York City schools with a focus on state policy and English language learners.
Contact Reema at ramin@chalkbeat.org.
People who have long COVID-19 can experience many of the same lingering negative effects on their physical, mental and social well-being as those experienced by people who become ill with other, non-COVID illnesses, new research suggests.
The findings, which were published in JAMA Network Open, are based on a comparison of people known to have been infected with COVID-19 with individuals with similar symptoms who tested negative for COVID.
The researchers found that 40% of the COVID-positive and 54% of the COVID-negative group reported moderate to severe residual symptoms three months after enrolling in the study.
“Many diseases, including COVID, can lead to symptoms negatively impacting one’s sense of well-being lasting months after initial infection, which is what we saw here,” said lead author Lauren Wisk, an assistant professor of medicine in the division of general internal medicine and health services research at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA.
“Because these changes look similar for COVID-negative and COVID-positive participants, this suggests the experience of the pandemic itself, and related stress, may be playing a role in slowing people’s recovery from any illness.”
Read the full news release.
It may surprise you to learn, given the pandemic mood of the country and indeed the world, that probably half of all Covid infections have happened this calendar year — and it’s only July.
By December, the figure could be 80 percent or more.
The gap between cases and severe outcomes is bigger than it has ever been, with the fraction of infections ending in deaths one-tenth that of the pandemic’s early stages.
But simply in terms of infection, this year towers over each of the previous two.
Between the discovery of the Delta variant and its takeover of America more than six months passed; with each of the new Omicron variants, we’ve barely had six weeks.
Many of the once-authoritative guides to the pandemic, perhaps acknowledging their declining authority among the public, have withdrawn a bit.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention changed the standards of its local-guidance maps, raising the threshold for concern much higher, though with the rapid spread of the BA.5 variant, most of the country is now meeting it anyway.
Mitigation policies, which had been mostly calibrated to local and national spread for two years, have disappeared as a pandemic signpost too.
In late April and early May, when nearly as many New Yorkers got sick as had during the initial Omicron surge that peaked in January — perhaps 1.5 million in the spring surge, compared with 1.8 million in the earlier wave, according to a pair of CUNY preprints using the same methodology — hardly anyone noticed.
Hospitalizations ticked up, followed by deaths, but not nearly as rapidly or as worryingly as just a few months before.
The same has happened, more recently, in San Francisco, where according to wastewater data there were recently more Covid infections than there were at the peak of the initial Omicron wave in January.
Nationally, the BA.5 wave does not appear to have crested yet, but so far deaths, while rising, are doing so relatively slowly.
Pull far enough back in looking at the graphs and it’s hard to even see the increase.
Hospitalizations have doubled roughly since May but are still only a quarter as high as they were at the peak of the initial Omicron wave and well below any of the pandemic’s previous peaks.
I.C.U. admissions have barely budged.
Elizabeth Decker had a stressful second pregnancy, plagued by daily vomiting and the worry that this baby, like her first, would drive her blood pressure dangerously high and need to be delivered preterm.
Oddly, the most relaxing part was her final trimester, which overlapped with the world’s descent into Covid lockdown in spring 2020.
Ms. Decker, who is 36 and lives in North Reading, Mass., decided to leave her high-pressure job as a lawyer and stay home.
Her husband, a teacher, started working from home at that time, teaching online.
He cared for their toddler and handled meals while Ms. Decker rested and slept.
“I was able to really not do anything for the last three months of my pregnancy,” she said.
The blood pressure spike that her doctor had expected didn’t arrive until late June, a week past Ms. Decker’s due date, at which point she delivered a healthy baby.
An ambitious worldwide study of births suggests that Ms. Decker was not the only expectant parent who avoided the experience of a preterm delivery during the earliest months of lockdown.
The study, published Monday in the journal Nature Human Behavior, showed that across a group of mostly high-income countries — such as the United States, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Denmark and Switzerland — in spring 2020, there were about 4 percent fewer preterm births than expected.
At a global level, the study’s authors estimated, the change most likely added up to nearly 50,000 premature births averted in the first month of lockdown alone.
The finding could help researchers better understand the causes of preterm birth, which remain frustratingly elusive to medical science.
China stuck rigidly to a zero-COVID policy until December 2022.
This included travel restrictions, mass testing and mandatory quarantines.
The rapid lifting of this strategy led to a surge of COVID infections across the country.
There have been concerns that the Chinese lunar new year travel in January may cause this wave of COVID to spread much further and faster, with significant numbers of hospital admissions and deaths.
Lunar new year involves hundreds of millions of people travelling across the country, and is considered to be the world’s largest annual migration event.
So how have things been tracking in China, and how will lunar new year trips affect COVID transmission?
Our modelling may provide some clues.
This year lunar new year fell on January 22, though population movements for the celebrations began on January 7 and will run until February 15.
Domestic travel was expected to peak around January 19.
According to estimates from the Chinese Ministry of Transport, the total number of lunar new year travellers is expected to have increased by 99.5% over the same period in 2022 and returned to 70.3% of what it was in 2019.
Through WorldPop, a research group based at the University of Southampton which maps global population distribution for health and development, we have continued to analyse population movements and their relationship to COVID transmission throughout the pandemic.
Our earlier research indicated that lunar new year movements contributed significantly to the initial spread of the virus in January 2020.
This new wave has largely been driven by the omicron sub-lineages BA.5.2 and BF.7.
We used an epidemiological model to simulate the transmission of these omicron variants across 339 areas in mainland China from November 1, 2022 to February 28, 2023.
Read more: COVID is running rampant in China – but herd immunity remains elusive
This work has not yet been peer reviewed but our model estimated changes in the number of susceptible, exposed, infectious and recovered or isolated people within each area and their daily movements between areas.
We incorporated numerous different sources of data, including intracity and intercity mobility data, vaccine uptake data by province, and COVID-related search index data on the Chinese internet search platform Baidu.
An important element of our model is the R value, which indicates how many people on average one infected person will infect in a susceptible population.
We estimated R using reported case information and other data.
We compared the results of our model with online survey data on COVID infections, and we tested different R values and epidemiological parameters to better assess the uncertainties around our estimates.
Past the peak
Baidu searches with the term “fever” showed that most Chinese areas reached a peak in searches around December 20.
Baidu searches for ‘fever’
Based on this and other data, and an R value of 10, further adjusted by intracity mobility data, our model estimated that COVID infections nationwide peaked around December 26 to 28.
At that time, roughly 4.2% of the Chinese population were probably infected, as shown in the figure below.
Estimated COVID infections in China
We also estimated that infections in 76% of areas peaked in December and 21% between January 1 and 10.
The remaining 3% would reach the peak after January 10.
By December 31, we believe 73%–79% of all people in China would have been infected in this wave.
Estimated infection peaks by area
Our estimates under an R value of 10 are consistent with the recent reports released by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
The CDC reported that the positive rate of COVID tests peaked between December 22 and 27 across the country.
China passed the peaks of fever-related outpatient visits for both rural and urban areas (peaked on December 23), emergency department visits (January 2) and admission of severe cases (January 5).
Our results are also consistent with the findings of recent online surveys on COVID infections conducted in different provinces.
For example, the Sichuan CDC in the western province of China reported that the overall infection rate of its residents had exceeded 80% by January 1, with a peak between December 12 and December 23.
And Henan province in central China reported that its infection rate was 89% by January 6, after peaking on December 19.
So what about lunar new year?
Since most cities are estimated to have passed the peak of infections before January 10, and the majority of the population has already been infected, we expect the lunar new year travel will have a limited impact on the trajectory of COVID transmission in this wave across the country.
Of course, there may be subsequent waves of infections, for example in summer, due to waning immunity and the possible emergence of new variants.
Read more: COVID: what we know about new omicron variant BF.7
We intend to refine our analysis with the latest data and publish a full report setting out our research in the coming weeks.
But it’s important to note that at this stage, this work has not yet been peer-reviewed.
Whatever the precise estimates this and other models generate, it’s clear there are significant risks of severe disease and death among vulnerable groups such as the elderly.
There’s also high pressure on health services, and relatively inadequate healthcare resources in rural areas.
Measures like increased vaccine uptake in older people will be vital to ensuring the impact of COVID in China is reduced in future waves.
A one-time test could predict which people hospitalized with COVID-19 are likely to worsen significantly during their stay, even if they were admitted with relatively mild symptoms, according to a study of more than 2,500 people headed by researchers at Stanford Medicine.
The test measures patient blood levels of a protein on the virus that causes COVID-19.
High levels of the protein correlated strongly with an increased need for respiratory support five days later, regardless of the patient’s disease severity when the test was conducted, the researchers found.
People whose levels were high were also likely to be hospitalized significantly longer than those with lower levels.
The findings suggest that the virus may continue to replicate in a subset of hospitalized patients, and that those patients might benefit from antiviral treatments like monoclonal antibodies or remdesivir.
Such antiviral treatments are now primarily used in outpatient settings after previous clinical trials showed they did not benefit hospitalized patients.
“The way we’ve been thinking about COVID-19 is that antivirals are most helpful early in disease, to stop viral replication before a person becomes really sick,” said Angela Rogers, MD, associate professor of pulmonary and critical care.
“When a person is sick enough to be hospitalized, it seems that the inflammatory response to the virus causes many of their clinical symptoms.
Some have suggested that it is time to stop studying antivirals in the sickest patients who are hospitalized with COVID-19.
But this study suggests that a subset of patients might benefit from antiviral therapies even after hospitalization.”
Rogers is the lead author of the study, which was published online Aug. 30 in the Annals of Internal Medicine.
She headed an international group of researchers in analyzing the results of a large, multicenter clinical trial of antiviral therapies in hospitalized COVID-19 patients called the ACTIV-3, or TICO (therapeutics for inpatients with COVID-19) trial.
Testing antivirals
The ACTIV-3 trial was designed to test five antiviral drugs versus a placebo in hospitalized COVID-19 patients.
Rogers and her colleagues studied more than 2,500 people hospitalized for COVID-19 at multiple locations in the United States, Europe, Asia and Africa between August 2020 and mid-November 2021 — a period that spanned the rise of the delta variant of the virus around the globe.
Few of the patients were vaccinated.
Blood samples from patients were tested at the time of their enrollment in the study for the presence of the telltale protein from the nucleocapsid, or outer covering, of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which causes COVID-19.
Ninety-five percent of the participants had detectable levels of this protein, called the N protein.
Of them, 57% had levels equal to or higher than 1,000 nanograms per liter (a nanogram is one-billionth of a gram).
On average, people with levels above 1,000 ng/L were sicker at the time of sample collection than those with lower levels of N protein in their blood.
At first blush, the findings may seem obvious — more virus might suggest a higher burden of infection or that the immune system is not able to control the infection.
But the researchers teased out some important subtleties when they compared the relative N protein levels in 1,085 patients randomly assigned to receive a placebo treatment with their symptoms five days after sample collection.
“Within every level of disease severity, people with higher protein, or antigen, levels were at a markedly higher risk of worsening,” Rogers said.
“People with high levels of antigen, but who could breathe without oxygen when they enrolled in the study, were five times more likely than someone with lower levels of antigen to require oxygen supplementation five days later.”
Another month, another COVID surge.
As the highly contagious omicron subvariant BA.5 spreads across California and the country — pushing the Golden State’s seven-day test positivity rate to 16.7% as of Thursday — all levels of government seem to be sending mixed messages about how we should respond.
Case in point: U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Xavier Becerra on Friday extended the country’s COVID public health emergency order for the tenth time.
But on Monday, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ended its COVID monitoring program for cruise ships, noting, “Cruise ships have access to guidance and tools to manage their own COVID-19 mitigation programs.
Additionally, cruise travelers have access to recommendations that allow them to make informed decisions about cruise ship travel.”
But rarely are COVID recommendations consistent — even within the same state.
Take California, which at the state level has been slowly dismantling its emergency pandemic response and leaving many details to the counties: Although the CDC categorizes 42 of 58 counties as having high levels of COVID community transmission — at which point it recommends universal masking in indoor public spaces — only Los Angeles County appears poised to reinstate an indoor mask mandate, a move it could make as soon as July 29.
In the Bay Area, where wastewater surveys suggest there is more COVID circulating than there was at the height of the winter omicron surge, county health officials told the San Francisco Chronicle they have no plans to bring back restrictions such as mask mandates.
Indeed, the mask mandate for riders of BART — the Bay Area’s public transit system — expired Monday.
By contrast, masks once again became mandatory Monday at a host of locations, including San Diego Unified schools, UC Irvine and San Diego military bases.
Face coverings are also required at UCLA, UC Riverside and Los Angeles film sets, and are a precondition — along with proof of vaccination or a negative COVID test — to attending the massive Comic-Con International convention in San Diego later this week.
Despite California’s uptick in positive cases — which is almost certainly an undercount, given how many people don’t report at-home test results or don’t test at all — and a surge in reinfections and hospitalizations, the threat of serious illness and death appears to have tapered off for most vaccinated and boosted patients.
One key example: Of the 30 COVID-positive patients currently receiving care at LAC+USC Medical Center in Los Angeles County, just 3 were admitted due to “illness caused by COVID,” the hospital said Monday, adding that none are in the ICU and no one has been intubated in several months.
Of the 30 COVID-positive patients currently receiving care at LAC+USC Medical Center in Los Angeles County, just 3 were admitted due to “illness caused by COVID,” the hospital said Monday, adding that none are in the ICU and no one has been intubated in several months.
But, the hospital added, “These facts should not negate the importance of vaccination and other COVID-19 safety measures, nor should they be used to promote baseless political arguments against such measures.
… The pandemic is still ongoing and unpredictable.”
In other public health news:
Advertisement
The coronavirus bottom line: As of Thursday, California had 9,677,827 confirmed cases (+0.6% from previous day) and 92,185 deaths (+0.1% from previous day), according to state data now updated just twice a week on Tuesdays and Fridays.
CalMatters is also tracking coronavirus hospitalizations by county.
California has administered 78,156,577 vaccine doses, and 71.5% of eligible Californians are fully vaccinated.
Advertisement
Other Stories You Should Know
1
Newsom still ensnared in 2024 rumors
Gov. Gavin Newsom gives his State of the State speech in Sacramento on March 8, 2022.
Photo by Miguel Gutierrez Jr., CalMatters
It seems that the more vehemently Gov. Gavin Newsom denies he’s considering a presidential run in 2024, the more insistently rumors to the contrary swirl.
CNBC reported Monday that Newsom is among the high-profile Democrats contacting influential donors who helped raise money for President Joe Biden’s 2020 campaign.
Although the politicians — including Newsom and Vice President Kamala Harris — did not explicitly ask for support, benefactors said they may be attempting to shore up financial support ahead of a possible presidential run.
CNBC also reported that Newsom is among the seven governors set this week to attend a fundraiser for the Democratic Governors Association at the Santa Monica home of Heather Podesta, an influential lobbyist and longtime party fundraiser.
As many as 125 people, including big-dollar donors, are expected to be in attendance.
Nathan Click, a spokesperson for Newsom’s reelection campaign, told CNBC:
Newsom “regularly participates in DGA fundraisers and believes strongly in helping Democratic governors win across the country.”
Another boost to Newsom’s potential campaign were the results of an (admittedly unscientific) reader survey conducted by Conor Friedersdorf, a staff writer for The Atlantic.
Friedersdorf asked his newsletter subscribers if Biden should seek reelection in 2024; an “overwhelming majority” said no.
Among the most frequently mentioned replacements: Newsom and Minnesota Sen. Amy Klobuchar.
In other election news: In a sign that California could play a pivotal role in determining which party secures control of the U.S. House of Representatives in November, five of the six candidates added Monday to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee’s “Red to Blue” program are running in the Golden State.
They’ll receive fundraising, organizing and other support from the committee as it seeks to flip GOP-held seats.
Californians now account for more than one-fifth of the 33 candidates in the Red to Blue program, according to the Los Angeles Times.
A similar program run by the National Republican Congressional Committee, called “Young Guns,” is supporting five California House candidates.
2 Gabriel shares details on Israel trip
Assemblymember Jesse Gabriel speaks at Pierce College in Los Angeles on April 3, 2022.
Photo courtesy of Jesse Gabriel
If all the Newsom speculation seems like much ado about nothing, consider that he “seemed to be on folks’ radar” when state lawmakers on a recent trip to Israel discussed U.S. presidential elections with Israeli political leaders — though Newsom wasn’t mentioned as frequently in regard to 2024.
That was one of the interesting takeaways from my wide-ranging text conversation Monday with the trip’s organizer, Assemblymember Jesse Gabriel, as the Van Nuys Democrat flew with his three children to the East Coast to visit his wife’s family.
The flight was going smoothly, he wrote, “other than my 2 year old spilling water all over the stranger next to us.”
The Israel trip is among a handful of junkets on which state lawmakers have embarked during their month-long summer recess, which ends Aug. 1.
These trips are typically funded not by taxpayers, but by special interests that lobby the Legislature.
Gabriel shared some key details from the Israel trip, which ran for most attendees from July 5 to July 12 or 13:
The trip was sponsored by the California Jewish Legislative Caucus Leadership Foundation, a nonprofit affiliated with the Legislature’s Jewish caucus, and funded by the Koret Foundation and the Jewish Federation of Greater Los Angeles.
Lawmakers were also asked to contribute $1,000 to the caucus’ foundation to help cover expenses.
Gabriel said he’s planning to pay with campaign funds.
a nonprofit affiliated with the Legislature’s Jewish caucus, and funded by the and the Lawmakers were also asked to contribute $1,000 to the caucus’ foundation to help cover expenses.
Gabriel said he’s planning to pay with campaign funds.
15 Democratic lawmakers attended: Assemblymembers Gabriel, Buffy Wicks, Isaac Bryan, Evan Low, Robert Rivas, Luz Rivas, Blanca Rubio, Freddie Rodriguez, Matt Haney, Chris Ward and Richard Bloom; and state Sens. Ben Allen, Scott Wiener, Steve Glazer and Susan Rubio.
The CEO of the Koret Foundation also joined, and two staff members of the Los Angeles Jewish Federation were there for most of the trip.
Assemblymembers Gabriel, Buffy Wicks, Isaac Bryan, Evan Low, Robert Rivas, Luz Rivas, Blanca Rubio, Freddie Rodriguez, Matt Haney, Chris Ward and Richard Bloom; and state Sens. Ben Allen, Scott Wiener, Steve Glazer and Susan Rubio.
The CEO of the Koret Foundation also joined, and two staff members of the Los Angeles Jewish Federation were there for most of the trip.
Lawmakers met with Israeli and Palestinian political leaders in Jerusalem, Ramallah and Tel Aviv.
The purpose of the trip, Gabriel said, was to “learn about developments in Israel and the region; explore opportunities for partnership on issues of mutual concern such as water, the environment and technological innovation; and help lawmakers better understand the Jewish community and our relationship to Israel.”
Lawmakers also visited Yad Vashem, Israel’s official Holocaust memorial and museum, and met with leaders and activists from the Israeli LGBTQ community.
The purpose of the trip, Gabriel said, was to “learn about developments in Israel and the region; explore opportunities for partnership on issues of mutual concern such as water, the environment and technological innovation; and help lawmakers better understand the Jewish community and our relationship to Israel.”
Lawmakers also visited Yad Vashem, Israel’s official Holocaust memorial and museum, and met with leaders and activists from the Israeli LGBTQ community.
Gabriel added: “The Jewish Caucus has been working in recent years to try to put more energy and resources behind the CA-Israel MOU that was signed by Governor Brown a few years ago.
We see huge potential benefits to our constituents in CA from stronger partnership and collaboration with Israel and Israeli companies.”
One last noteworthy nugget: Gabriel, who’s authoring a high-profile bill to force social media companies to be more transparent about their terms of service, told me he plans to attend an upcoming two-day event at a Napa Valley resort and spa.
The Technology Policy Summit, sponsored by a foundation affiliated with the Legislature’s tech caucus, is an opportunity for tech lobbyists who donate at least $10,000 to the foundation to rub shoulders with lawmakers ahead of critical votes on controversial bills to regulate the industry, as Los Angeles Times editorial writer Laurel Rosenhall reported this weekend.
Asked if he is facing pressure from the tech industry or other players to make changes to his bill, Gabriel simply responded, “Yes.”
3 A new tool for tenants
The Fresno County Superior Court on June 17, 2022.
Photo by Larry Valenzuela, CalMatters/CatchLight Local
With thousands of California households in limbo after statewide pandemic eviction protections expired last month, more than 50 tenant advocates and attorneys are today launching an online tool to help renters facing an eviction notice from their landlord, CalMatters’ Manuela Tobias reports.
Thousands of California tenants lose their homes every year for failing to file an official response to an eviction notice within five days.
The groups say their tool — which they’re billing as the first of its kind nationwide — will help tenants buy at least 10 days of time to file an amended response and find a lawyer before the court trial.
UCLA law professor Gary Blasi, one of the lead housing lawyers behind the tool: “As a lawyer it really pained me to see tenants lose cases just because they couldn’t file a piece of paper.”
Advertisement
CalMatters Commentary CalMatters columnist Dan Walters: Newsom and other Democratic politicians have been highly critical of how red states such as Florida and Texas conduct themselves, but are clearly not above punching holes in California’s time-honored sunshine laws.
State bill would push insurers to stop playing doctor: Lawmakers should pass a bill to allow patients to get urgently needed treatments without unnecessary delays from insurance companies, argues Vivian Gonzalez, a Los Angeles public health nurse.
Advertisement
Other things worth your time
Some stories may require a subscription to read
Newsom’s bid to make textbooks free delayed in community colleges central office.
// EdSource
No-bid Medi-Cal contract for Kaiser Permanente is now law, but key details are missing.
// California Healthline
California nurse-midwives struggle to receive abortion training.
// Los Angeles Times
What would California do if there’s a nationwide abortion ban?
// Sacramento Bee
Pending strike sign of hospitals’ staffing woes.
//
Bakersfield Californian
How California’s coercive control law could help women manipulated by partners.
// San Francisco Public Press
California courts start penalizing psychological domestic abuse.
// San Francisco Public Press
Expanding view of domestic violence gives California survivors new tool, but unsympathetic judges remain an obstacle.
// San Francisco Public Press
New social media account lambasts Sheriff’s Department leadership.
// San Diego Union-Tribune
Police accountability department: SFPD rejects help, delays policy updates.
// Mission Local
Fresno council president charged with felony over alleged extortion.
// GV Wire
S.F. taxpayers shell out hundreds of thousands of dollars a year to disgraced city officials.
This plan would end that.
// San Francisco Chronicle
Anaheim mulls Disneyland ticket tax to meet budget deficit.
//
Voice of OC
S.F.’s $20,000 trash can prototype and 5 cheaper models hit the streets.
// San Francisco Chronicle
Mayor Breed, progressives to clash over affordable housing measures on S.F.’s November ballot.
// San Francisco Chronicle
Build more houses!
Use less water!
California, can you have it both ways?
// Southern California News Group
Move thousands of homeless people into landmark L.A. Sears building?
Some say no way.
// Los Angeles Times
How unhoused people ended up in the Mojave desert.
//
The Guardian
State Supreme Court move could make cities’ environmental reviews of housing projects more difficult.
// San Francisco Chronicle
How California’s exodus is changing the landscape in Bay Area and beyond.
// Mercury News
California to receive 7 firefighting planes from Defense Department, Newsom says.
// KTLA
Sharing stories, and a view, aboard the California Zephyr.
// New York Times
CapRadio and CalMatters expand content partnership to increase California news coverage.
//
CalMatters
Long COVID and cerebral/cardiovascular disease
COVID-19-associated CVD such as acute coronary syndromes (acute myocardial infarction or unstable angina), heart failure, arrhythmias, stroke, and thromboembolism, occurs not only in the early stages of infection but also several months later
[13].
In a UK study, 13.3% of 4182 predominantly community patients experienced at least one persistent symptom beyond four weeks of infection, of which half were considered cardiac in origin [14].
In an international online survey study of 3762 patients, cardiac symptoms including chest pain (~53%), palpitations (~68%), and fainting (~13%) were observed in up to 86% of patients by seven months from infection [15].
The prevalence of long COVID among 2550 patients using a social media survey demonstrated that cardiopulmonary symptoms were reported by 89% of participants in their study [16].
A prospective study report from Italy found that only 13% had complete recovery of symptoms, 53% had general fatigue, 43% had dyspnea, and chest pain in 22% [17].
A follow-up study of 1733 hospitalized patients from Wuhan, China, showed that 63% of patients reported fatigue, 26% breathlessness, and 5–9% experienced chest pain and palpitations at six months post-infection [18].
By 12 months, the same investigators of the study showed that symptoms of breathlessness (30%) and chest pain (7%) were slightly more common, while fatigue had improved (20%)
[19].
In a study from the UK, only 29% showed improvement in their pre-symptomatic state, 56% complained of fatigue, 48% of dyspnea, and 39% of worsening pain symptoms
[20].
Thus, the complication rate of CVD and cardiopulmonary symptoms associated with COVID-19 varied widely depending on the severity of the patient, the time of infection and the region [13].
Recently, Xie and colleagues found an increased risk and excess burden of incident CVD among all subgroup of patients with COVID-19 compared with the control group [21].
This cohort study of the US Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) national healthcare database consisted of 153,760 COVID-19 survivors and two control groups, 5,637,647 non-SARS-CoV-2 infected subjects and 5,859,411 historical cohort (before the COVID-19 pandemic), reported that patients with COVID-19 were at increased risk of incident CVD at one year after infection, even among patients who were not hospitalized during the acute phase of the infection.
These diseases included atrial fibrillation [(hazard ratio (HR) 1.71, 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 1.64–1.79)], ischemic heart disease (HR 1.72, 95% CI 1.56–1.90), pericarditis (HR 1.85, 95% CI 1.61–2.13), myocarditis (HR 5.38, 95% CI 3.80–7.59), heart failure (HR 1.72, 95% CI 1.65–1.80), thromboembolic disease (HR 2.93, 95% CI 2.73–3.15), stroke (HR 1.52, 95% CI 1.43–2.62), and transient ischemic attacks (TIA) (HR 1.49, 95% CI 1.37–1.62)
[21].
Moreover, the increased risk of CVD was observed both in the presence and absence of cardiovascular risk factors or pre-existing CVD [21].
Although cardiovascular risk increases in parallel with the severity of the acute COVID-19, even individuals with mild COVID-19 are at increased risk of CVD [22].
These studies indicate that COVID-19 can increase the risk of developing CVD after the acute infection, even in individuals who were at low risk of CVD before having COVID-19.
Regarding the cardiovascular function, a case-matched study from Germany comprehensively assessed the intermediate-term impact of a mild to moderate course of COVID-19 on multiple organ-specific function [23].
The study reported that the left and right ventricular function was slightly lowered, and the concentrations of troponin and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) were significantly higher in post-COVID-19 [23].
As for the vascular system, sonographically non-compressible femoral veins, suggesting deep vein thrombosis, were substantially more frequent after COVID-19 [23].
Also, in a prospective cohort study over a six-month follow-up, COVID-19 patients were shown to develop endothelial dysfunction (as assessed by flow-mediated dilatation; FMD), which, though improved, remained impaired compared to healthy controls subjects [24].
Among adult patients with COVID-19 who were admitted to the hospital and required oxygenation with moderate disease or higher, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed cardiac involvement in 78% and ongoing myocardial inflammation in 60%, independent of preexisting conditions, severity and overall course of the acute illness, and time from the original diagnosis [25].
In patients with symptomatic long COVID-19 (three months after an acute phase), cardiac MRI showed (post-) inflammatory cardiac sequelae in 28% patients, with signs of myocarditis (such as nonischemic late gadolinium enhancement or pathologic findings in T1 or T2 mapping)
[26].
Wang et al. showed that myocardium injury (depressed left ventricular global circumferential strain and peak right ventricular strains) existed in 30% of COVID-19 patients at three-month follow-up [27].
Although there is a possibility that myocardial damage or heart failure may have occurred before SARS-CoV-2 infection, myocardial damage due to myocarditis or other causes should be considered, and cardiac MRI strain analysis can be a sensitive tool to evaluate the recovery of left and right ventricular dysfunction.
Recent guidance from the European Society of Cardiology indicated that cardiopulmonary symptoms including chest pain, shortness of breath, fatigue, and autonomic manifestations such as postural orthostatic tachycardia are common and associated with significant disability and heightened anxiety
[28].
Possible pathophysiological mechanisms for delayed cardiovascular complications are not well understood, which will be covered later.
As for brain and neurological sequela of COVID-19, various symptoms and disorders, such as “brain fog”, headache, neurocognitive dysfunction, mood and sleep disorders, and fatigue are known [29].
Also, development of dysautonomia including blood pressure abnormality, such as hypertension, postural hypotension, among patients with COVID-19 was reported [30, 31]
Furthermore, while patients with COVID-19 have an increased risk of stroke, post-stroke depression and anxiety may explain some parts of symptoms of long COVID.
The mechanisms for the extensive damages of COVID-19 on neurological aspects are not well known.
Yet, direct viral invasion of the brain and vascular structures, abnormal immune and inflammatory reaction, neurological consequences secondary to hypoxia and multi-organ failure, and social isolation during the pandemic may explain some parts of neurological sequela of COVID-19
[32, 33].
Long COVID and the kidney
Acute kidney injury (AKI) has been reported to be a frequent observation in patients with COVID-19 at an acute phase, which significantly influences the clinical outcomes.
Moreover, CKD is one of the independent factors for severe COVID-19, highlighting the close association between COVID-19 and kidney diseases.
As for the cause of kidney injury that accompanies COVID-19, both direct and indirect mechanisms have been proposed.
In the former, it has been demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 RNAs are present in renal parenchyma and that the virus can directly enter renal cells [34].
In the latter, multiple factors such as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), systemic inflammatory response, endothelial injury, and hypercoagulation contribute to the deterioration of renal function.
Several studies have been identified that describe the mid-term kidney outcome (from three months up to one year) in COVID-19 patients (Table 1)
[18, 35,36,37,38,39].
In an initial study by Hultstrom et al., 60 patients with COVID-19 admitted to ICU were assessed for renal function (average follow-up time of 18 weeks)
[37].
In these patients, those who had stage 3 AKI during the ICU stay were more likely to progress to a higher CKD stage.
In another study, Stockmann et al. retrospectively analyzed renal outcomes in 74 patients with COVID-19 who had AKI requiring kidney replacement therapy
[39].
After a median follow-up of 151 days, 36 (49%) patients died, one patient was still hospitalized, and 37 patients (50%) had been discharged.
Among those who were alive and out of hospital at the follow up, 23 patients had full recovery of kidney function, whereas three patients were dependent on kidney replacement therapy.
These data suggest that, although renal recovery is common following AKI in COVID-19, a significant portion of patients can have a variable degree of reduced kidney function at a post-acute phase.
Table 1
Summary of studies on Long COVID and hypertension related organs/disorders Full size table
The study by Bowe et al. provided largest and detailed data on kidney outcomes in a post-acute phase [35].
The authors analyzed the US Department of Veterans Affairs national healthcare databases for the assessment of post-acute sequelae of COVID-19, and found that the patients have increased risks and burdens of AKI and CKD at 6 months after SARS-CoV-2 infection [9].
In a more detailed analysis on the kidney outcome that included 89,216 patients, the authors found that 30-day survivors of COVID-19 exhibited a higher risk of AKI, eGFR decline, end-stage kidney disease, and major adverse kidney outcome (defined as eGFR decline of 50% or more, end-stage kidney disease, or all-cause mortality) compared with non-infected controls after adjustment for baseline characteristics [35].
The study concluded that patients with COVID-19 exhibited increased risk of kidney diseases in the post-acute phase of COVID-19.
Gu et al. provided data on 1-year outcome of kidney function in patients with COVID-19
[36].
In this study, 1,734 participants with COVID-19 discharged from hospital were invited to follow up at 6 and 12 months after the onset (the median follow-up duration was 342 days).
After multivariable adjustment, the primary outcome, which was the percentage of eGFR decreased from acute phase to follow-up, was 8.3% (95% CI 6.0–10.6) higher among patients who had AKI than those without AKI at the acute phase.
Participants with AKI had an odds ratio (OR) of 4.6 (95% CI 2.1–10.1) for reduced renal function (defined as an eGFR of less than 60 ml/min/1.73 m2) and an OR of 2.5 (95% CI 1.3–5.1) for proteinuria (defined as 1+ proteinuria or higher on urine dipstick testing) at follow-up visit.
The risk for reduced renal function at follow-up increased along with the AKI stage, with OR of 22.1 for those who had AKI stage 3.
The authors concluded that AKI at an acute phase of COVID-19 was closely related to the longitudinal decrease in kidney function at 1 year after the onset.
Nugent et al.
compared the rate of change in eGFR after discharge in patients with COVID-19-associated AKI (n = 182) and those with AKI not associated with COVID-19 (n = 1430)
[38].
In this retrospective cohort study, median duration of follow-up was 93 days for those with COVID-19 and 61 days for those without COVID-19.
The study found that patients with COVID-19-associated AKI had a greater decrease in eGFR in the unadjusted model (difference in slope, −11.3 ml/min/1.73 m2/y), and the significant difference in slope was also observed in the fully adjusted model (−14.0 ml/min/1.73 m2/y).
These data support that AKI associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection can have a significant impact on kidney function also at a post-acute phase.
Long COVID and endocrine disease
In humans, both angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) are expressed in several endocrine glands, including the pituitary gland, thyroid gland, adrenal gland, testes and ovaries [40].
Several studies suggest that the endocrine system is affected by SARS-CoV-2 infection, both acutely and chronically.
Pituitary gland
Studies have shown that an acute impairment of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) secretion from the pituitary was observed in 32% of inpatients with COVID-19
[41].
As for the long-term effects, secretion of ACTH and growth hormone was significantly decreased in patients with COVID-19 at three months after the acute phase than healthy controls [42].
However, in another study, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) secretion is reported to be preserved [43].
Therefore, the degrees of perturbation in pituitary function seem variable at a post-acute phase, which requires further study.
Thyroid gland
There are several case reports of thyroid disorder associated with COVID-19, such as subacute thyroiditis [44], nonthyroidal illness syndrome
[45], and Graves’ thyrotoxicosis
[46].
Although the precise mechanisms are unclear, these can be caused either by direct infection of the SARS-CoV-2 to the thyroid or by autoimmune effects mediated by cytokine storm [47].
Interleukin 6, which is likely to be involved in cytokine storm in COVID-19
[48], are also shown to be elevated in Graves’ disease [49].
Regarding the persistent effects of COVID-19, transient reductions in TSH and free thyroxine (FT4) were shown to be normalized at a post-acute phase (median time, 79 days; interquartile range, 52–108 days)
[50].
In relation to long COVID, one study reported that the thyroid function was normal and was not associated with chronic symptoms at least 3 months after the diagnosis of COVID-19
[43].
However, in a retrospective analysis involving 186 patients with COVID-19, the ratio of FT4/TSH was decreased in patients with long COVID symptoms, suggesting that the hormonal changes may be associated with the persistent symptoms [51].
Adrenal gland
Primary adrenal insufficiency has been reported in several cases with COVID-19 either by the direct invasion of SARS-CoV-2 or by acute adrenal infarction and acute adrenal hemorrhage
[52,53,54].
It is also possible that exogenous steroid used for the treatment of COVID-19 may impair adrenal function by suppressing the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.
As for the long-term effect of COVID-19, adrenal function was preserved in all COVID-19 survivors at least 3 months after presentation with COVID-19 [43].
However, Salzano et al. described adrenal insufficiency in a patient with COVID-19 who was treated with dexamethasone and was suffered from long COVID symptoms persisting for 3 months [55].
Therefore, adrenal insufficiency may need to be considered in patients with long COVID symptoms [56].
Reproductive system (testes and ovaries)
SARS-CoV-2 infection can cause damage to the testes [57].
Significant loss of germ cells but not Sertoli cells was observed at postmortem in patients with COVID-19
[57].
In addition, several case reports have documented that patients with COVID-19 can present with testicular pain, which was associated with orchitis, epididymo-orchitis, and testicular infarction [58,59,60,61,62].
COVID-19 may reduce spermatogenesis [63] and serum levels of total testosterone [64] or free testosterone
[65] either directly, via hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, or via impaired secretion of gonadotropin releasing hormone, a phenomenon known to occur with physiological stressors [66].
Despite acute reduction in testosterone in patients with COVID-19, one study suggests that any fall in testosterone levels resolves spontaneously after recovery from acute illness [67].
However, a prospective, longitudinal cohort study with a follow-up time of 60 days reported impairments in semen volume, progressive motility, sperm morphology, sperm concentration, and the number of spermatozoa in male patient with COVID-19 [68]
Survey for women of reproductive age indicated that nearly half of the participants experienced the change in the menstrual cycle after the COVID-19 pandemic, highlighting the impact of the psychological distress on reproductive health
[69].
However, it is currently unclear whether SARS-CoV-2 infection itself can affect female reproductive system.
In one study that involved female patients with COVID-19 and non-infected subjects, serum levels of several hormones such as anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), testosterone, and prolactin were altered, and the changes in these hormones were significantly associated with COVID-19 in multivariate analysis [70].
In another study, on the other hand, there were no differences in sex hormones such as follicle-stimulating hormone, estradiol, testosterone, progesterone and AMH compared with age-matched controls [71].
In an international cohort study on long COVID, prolonged menstrual issues such as abnormally irregular periods, heavy periods, and post-menopausal bleeding have been reported [15].
However, given the susceptibility of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis to physical and psychological stress, it is unclear to what extent these issues are attributable to the biological effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Study design
This paper reports the baseline survey results of 248 COVID-19 survivor participants in the CU-COVID19 study, a multi-centre web-based observational cohort study of the incident mental morbidity of COVID-19 survivors, healthcare workers, ex-quarantine confines, and the general Hong Kong population.
This analysis included all 248 baseline surveys that were completed between March-2021 to January-2022 by individuals who were hospitalized for COVID-19 on average 321 days (47–570 days) since hospitalization.
(All COVID-19 cases in Hong Kong were hospitalized up to January 2022.)
Respondents were recruited from a Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) research database consisting of 751 COVID-19 patients with verified hospital admissions and clinical data.
Patients in the database were considered eligible if they were aged 18-75 and able to read Chinese.
631 patients were eligible after excluding 19 patients aged over 75 and 101 patients unable to read Chinese.
To minimise response bias, we had systematically reached all 631 eligible COVID-19 patients 3 times each.
Of the eligible patients, 158 declined and 109 were unreachable.
The remaining 364 patients had all provided informed consent to participate in the study and received a confidential Qualtrics survey link via email or text messages.
To maximise completion, shopping coupons worth HKD100 were offered as incentives, and up to 5 biweekly SMS or emails were sent to those with an incomplete response.
Of the 364 consented participants, 248 completed the survey (Please see Supplementary Fig.
S2 online for a recruitment flowchart).
Response rate was 39.3% (248 completed/ 631 eligible).
There were no significance differences in the age and gender of responders and non-responders (Age T (629) =0.068, p=0.95; Gender X2 (1) = 1.04 p=0.3).
We were not able to access clinical data of non-responders as most had not provided consent to this study.
The authors assert that all procedures contributing to this work comply with the ethical standards of the relevant national and institutional committees on human experimentation and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2008.
All procedures involving human subjects/patients were approved by the Clinical Research Ethics Committee of the Hong Kong New Territories East cluster, The Hong Kong Island East and Kowloon West cluster (Ref no.
2020.338-T).
Assessments
The COVID-19 Mental Health impact survey was developed and standardized in collaboration with the World Mental Health Survey COVID workgroup29,30, including the following items:
Socio-demographic data, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and somatic symptoms were assessed at the same time during the survey, which was completed between March-2021 and January-2022.
Socio-demographic data included age, sex, education, and marital status.
Depression was screened using the full Chinese PHQ9 which included one item on fatigue, with a cut-off score of ≥10.
The Chinese PHQ9 had demonstrated good psychometric properties, including an internal consistency reliability of 0.86 and a 2-week test-retest correlation of 0.8631.
Anxiety was assessed with the Chinese GAD7 with a cut-off score of ≥10, which showed a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.91 and an AUC of 0.88 for discriminating GAD32.
SUD was determined using the Chinese CAGE-AID Questionnaire (“Cut, Annoyed, Guilty, Eye-opener” questionnaire Adapted to Include Drugs) with a cut-off score of ≥1, which exhibited an AUC of 0.7, sensitivity of 66.7%, and specificity of 67.5%33.
PTSD was assessed using the PCL-5.
The 20-item Chinese PCL-5 had demonstrated good psychometric properties, with a Cronbach’s Alpha of 0.91 as well as good convergent and discriminant validity34.
The 20-item PCL-5 had been shortened into a 4-item version for brevity.
The 4-item English PCL-5 had good internal consistency (0.82) and accounted for 87% of the variance in the 20-item PCL5.
In our Chinese sample, we found a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.876 for the 4-item PCL535.
Thirty-day suicidal thoughts and behaviours was screened as any self-report of self-harm, suicidal thought, ideation, plan or action in the past 30 days, at least one month in the past year or considered likely to act on these thoughts in the next 3 months.
Somatic symptoms and fatigue were screened using the PHQ15 with a cut-off score of ≥10 and the CFQ with a cut-off score of ≥ 4.
The Chinese version of the PHQ15 demonstrated good reliability with a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.83 and discriminant validity from the PHQ9 and GAD734.
The Chinese version of the CFQ showed a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.86, good convergent validity with the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, and divergent validity with the 12-Item Short Form Survey36.
SCI was rated by the 5-item AMIC25, with cut-off point ≥3.
Items included self-reports of ‘forgetting where things are placed’, ‘unable to recall the names of good friends’, ‘unable to follow and recall conversation’, ‘subjective memory problems’, and ‘memory to be worse than others of a similar age’.
The sensitivities of AMIC in identifying mild cognitive impairment possible incipient dementia and early dementia are 65.3% and 70.4% respectively.
Role impairment was measured using a simplified Work Loss Days index from the validated version of the WHODAS 2.0, which demonstrated a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.85–0.98 across 16 countries37.
Social support was assessed with the OSSS-3, which had an acceptable internal consistency with a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.64 and a one-factor solution validated in confirmatory factor analysis38.
Resilience was measured using the CDRS, with the Chinese version exhibiting a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.877 and a test-retest correlation of 0.7339.
Participants indicated lifetime mental disorders from a list (depression, bipolar disorder, panic attacks, anxiety related problems, alcohol or SUD) or a territory-wide public hospital electronic registry showing record of diagnosis, treatment or prescription for any mental health problems before the COVID-19 outbreak in January 2020.
Clinical and laboratory data on COVID-19 infection severity and treatment was retrieved from hospital electronic records with explicit consent from participants.
Participants also indicated whether they had in the past year experienced traumatic events, knew someone who was infected, experienced financial stress, reduced household income from the pandemic, or had physical illnesses apart from COVID-19.
Statistical analysis
Unless otherwise specified, all analyses were age-sex weighted to Hong Kong’s COVID-19 infected population (n=10,830 circa 18 December 2021).
Demographics, COVID-19 severity and treatment, prevalence of mental disorders, somatization, fatigue, and SCI were reported.
The effects of sex and age on symptom severity (average symptom scores) and disorder prevalence were examined via chi-square and logistic regression.
The prevalence of positive screens and average scores for depression, anxiety, PTSD, and SUD in COVID-19 survivors were compared against a community sample (n=1834, representative household sample collected via mailing survey invitations to 10,000 randomly selected addresses generated by the Census Department between Nov-20 and Mar-22) age-sex weighted to the local COVID-19 population.
Association of time since infection with disorder prevalence and symptom severity were tested using logistic and linear regression.
Infection severity, mental disorder prevalence and symptom scores were compared between respondents with versus without a history of mental disorder using t-tests and chi-square tests.
We employed LPA to explicate the latent relationships between cognitive impairment, fatigue and neuropsychiatric symptoms.
LPA was performed using Mclust (v.5.4.8) in R, with PHQ9, GAD7, PCL5, PHQ15, CFQ, and AMIC in the data matrix.
The Mclust package models data as a Gaussian finite mixture under different covariance structures and number of mixture components.
Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) was selected a priori as criterion for parameter optimization.
Multivariate profiles generated by LPA were compared on demographics, COVID-19 infection severity and treatment, mental symptom scores, past mental disorders, treatment history, stressors experienced during the pandemic, social support, resilience, and impairment using chi-square/univariate ANOVA tests.
Between-group differences were tested using unweighted MANOVA, with univariate Sidak correction for multiple comparison for each of the six scales.
To identify the most important symptoms distinguishing the profiles, 51 unweighted individual symptom scores from PHQ9, GAD7, PCL5, PHQ15, AMIC, and CFQ were used to build machine learning classifiers (logistic regression and random forest) to differentiate profile pairs.
Data was split into training and tests sets with a 75:25 ratio, stratified on profile labels.
Model optimization was performed on the training set using grid search, with available options including number of estimators 10–300 in steps of 10, maximum number of features ‘auto’ or ‘sqrt’, maximum depth between 10 and 110 in steps of 10, minimum samples split and minimum sample leaf 1–10, with or without bootstrap.
The optimized models were evaluated based on their ability to correctly predict LPA labels based on the 51 symptom scores in the unseen test set.
Specifically, we defined accuracy as the proportion of correctly classified labels in the test set by the optimized model.
An interpretation algorithm, SHAP (Python SHAP v0·4), was then applied to the most accurate model to assess symptom importance.
SHAP assigns to each feature an importance value based on how much it pushes the predicted outcome from a base value.
SHAP values improve the interpretability of machine learning models by showing the direction and ratio of each feature’s contribution to a model without reference to the original scale40.
To validate the profiles, comparison was made of linear regression models of impairment (WHODAS) on demographic variables, history of mental disorder, and average symptom scores (Model 1) versus latent profile grouping (Model 2).
Standardized beta estimates for each predictor were presented as part of univariate, and multivariate regression controlling for other predictors.
Variance inflation factors assessed multicollinearity with each variable.
The contributions of newly included variables were tested stepwise using F-tests.
The two models were evaluated individually using R-squared, adjusted r-squared, and F-test (compared to intercept only).
Latent class analysis and WHODAS linear models were performed using R v.4.1.2.
SHAP.
Random forest and logistic regression models were run on Python v 3·7·4.
The remaining analyses were performed using SPSS v25.
A Sidak corrected alpha of 0·0085 (1–[1–0·06]^[1/6]) was used in the post-hoc univariate ANOVAS comparing the 6 scales in the LPA groups.
For other tests, an alpha level of 0·05 was used.
T-tests were two-tailed.
All other tests were one-tailed.
The R and Python code used in this analysis are available at a public repository at https://github.com/owennwl/CUCOVID19_DXLPA.
On Monday, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved updated Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna COVID-19 vaccines designed specifically to target a subvariant of omicron.
Though the vaccines have been approved for individuals 12 years of age and older — and authorized under emergency use for those ages 6 months through 11 years — the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has yet to make a recommendation on who should receive the new shots.
That decision is expected to be announced following a vote from the CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, or ACIP.
The vote is scheduled for Tuesday.
The state Department of Public Health sent all COVID vaccine providers in the state a notice regarding the newly-authorized booster yesterday, said Aimee Krause, director of health at the West Hartford-Bloomfield Health District.
DPH did not include details on when the shots would be available to the public.
Here’s what Connecticut residents should know about the updated COVID-19 shots.
What’s different about the new vaccines?
The new vaccines will “more closely target currently circulating variants,” according to the FDA.
The shots are monovalent, meaning they are designed to protect against a specific variant of omicron.
Will I have to pay for the COVID-19 booster shot?
The federal government will no longer purchase COVID vaccines, meaning that insurers and individuals will now have to pay for shots.
For those with private insurance, shots will likely remain free, but those without insurance will have to pay.
Doses run anywhere from $110 to $130, Krause said.
Uninsured children can still receive free COVD-19 vaccines through the federal Vaccines for Children program.
In early August, DPH spokesperson Chris Boyle confirmed that the state has limited information about subsidized doses for uninsured adults.
The federal government will make “a small number of doses” available through its Bridge Access Program and manufacturers will provide some additional doses, but he said the department does not have additional details about either initiative.
“There are no other state or federal funds to purchase COVID-19 vaccines for adults,” stated Boyle.
Will CT providers still distribute previous versions of the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines?
The DPH communication stated that as of Tuesday, providers can no longer administer the old version of the COVID booster, meaning people can’t get boosters until the newly-approved one becomes available.
DPH specified that the de-authorization of the previous booster, issued by the FDA, isn’t due to any safety concerns, but rather in anticipation of the new version becoming available.
“If people had appointments, we needed to reschedule those for when we have the new COVID Booster,” said Krause.
“We’re awaiting further information.”
A spokesperson for the Department of Public Health did not respond to a request for comment in time for publication.
Where can I get a COVID-19 booster shot?
Search for vaccine locations near you here.
Are most CT residents considered up-to-date on their COVID vaccine?
Around 25% of men and 29% of women in Connecticut are up-to-date on their vaccines, CDC data shows — meaning they’ve received one dose of an updated Pfizer or Moderna vaccine that protects against both the original virus and the omicron variant BA.4 and BA.5.
That vaccine became available in September 2022.
Have COVID cases been rising in Connecticut?
The state Department of Health has not been publicly reporting data on COVID-19 cases or positivity rates since June 1, but CDC data shows that hospitalizations have been on the rise in Connecticut over the past several weeks after falling sharply from January to July.
Since hitting a low of 80 the week of July 1, they rose to 184 the week of Aug. 26.
Here you will find all the information and resources necessary regarding our webinar: Tobacco taxes after the end of COVID-19 as a global health emergency, that will be held on Thursday, September 14th at 11:00 a.m. (EDT).
This lively exchange between experts on economics and health from governments, multi-laterals, and academia aims to foster a space for sharing evidence and experience, strengthening the position of stakeholders to further tobacco taxes in the Region.
THE WEBINAR RECORDING WILL BE AVAILABLE SOON HERE
About the webinar
The aim of this webinar is to share knowledge and experience through the exchange of reflections of different actors working on tobacco taxes across the Region, as to:
· Identify the challenges and opportunities to advance tobacco taxes following the end of the COVID-19 pandemic as a global health emergency context.
·
Explore the relationship between inflation and tobacco taxes and recount the policy decisions taken in inflationary contexts in the region and the world.
· Present the scientific evidence on the role of tobacco taxes on socioeconomic inequality.
· Present the experience of countries in the region of the Americas, and their current debate on the role of health taxes, including tobacco taxes, in tax reforms.
Context
The tobacco epidemic continues to be one of the biggest threats to public health worldwide, causing more than 8 million preventable deaths per year, including both smokers and non-smokers exposed to tobacco smoke.
During the COVID-19 emergency, the vulnerability of tobacco users to health complications became even more evident, with smokers having a much higher likelihood of having worse clinical outcomes than non-smokers.
The World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC) was developed to combat the tobacco epidemic.
Since its entry into force in 2005, it has facilitated significant progress in the Region.
The WHO FCTC and its guidelines provide the foundation for countries to implement and manage tobacco control.
In the Region of the Americas, 30/35 member states are party to the FCTC.
The Region has made continuous progress in the implementation and enforcement of tobacco control measures, as tracked since 2008 by the WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic.
However, there are still essential achievements pending.
Despite being categorized as a “best buy” by the WHO, or amongst the most cost-effective and feasible interventions to apply, the measure related to raising taxes has advanced the least amongst all tobacco control measures since 2008, at the regional level*.
Tobacco taxes have the ability to increase tax revenue collection and reduce consumption (and related burdens) simultaneously.
They have proven progressive distributional effects in the medium and long term.
And they are on the political and legislative agendas of countries around the Region, amidst a wave of tax reforms.
Indeed, the evidence overwhelmingly points towards tobacco taxes being an important policy tool to reduce tobacco consumption and improve population health.
In the context of recovering global economies and inflationary environments post the global health emergency of COVID-19, now, more than ever, working towards protecting gains and advancing progress in tobacco taxation in the Region, is critical.
*as measured by the WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic.
Agenda
An artist's rendering of the coronavirus responsible for COVID-19.
A monoclonal antibody used to treat asthma and eczema can improve survival for patients with moderate to severe COVID-19, a clinical trial conducted at UVA Health suggests.
The small trial, designed and led by Jennifer Sasson, MD, found that dupilumab improved patient survival at 60 days and reduced the number of patients who needed intensive care.
Almost 90% of patients who received dupilumab in the randomized trial were alive at 60 days, compared with 76.2% of patients who received a placebo (a harmless sham treatment).
“Our clinical trial suggests that treatment with the anti-allergy medicine dupilumab may decrease deaths due to COVID-19.
UVA is the first to test this novel and promising approach to COVID-19 treatment, which also proved safe in this small study – as we had expected, as dupilumab has proven safe and effective as an allergy medicine,” said Sasson, of the University of Virginia School of Medicine’s Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health.
“A large multi-institution study to validate these preliminary results is being designed.
If successful, this multi-site trial will open a new window to treatment of COVID-19 and potentially other viral pneumonias.”
Treating COVID-19
Sasson and her collaborators were inspired to launch the trial after discovering that patients with COVID-19 were at significantly greater risk of needing a ventilator if their blood contained high levels of interleukin-13, a driver of inflammation in the body.
Dupilumab, sold under the brand name Dupixent, works by blocking the effects of IL-13.
The federal Food and Drug Administration approved dupilumab in 2017 for the treatment of moderate to severe eczema (an itchy skin condition also known as atopic dermatitis).
Dupilumab is now also used to treat patients with asthma and chronic sinus inflammation.
To see if dupilumab could improve the body’s immune response to COVID-19, Sasson and her collaborators enrolled 40 patients with moderate to severe cases in a clinical trial.
The trial was double-blinded, meaning neither the patients nor the doctors knew whether the patient was receiving the antibody or a placebo.
Both groups of trial participants otherwise received standard care.
After 28 days, the two groups saw no difference in ventilator-free survival or in adverse events.
But by 60 days, there were only two deaths among the patients receiving dupilumab and five deaths among those receiving placebo.
Among the patients who were not already in the intensive care unit when they joined the trial, three receiving dupilumab were ultimately admitted to the ICU.
That’s compared with six of those receiving placebo.
While dupilumab is not a magic bullet against COVID-19, the UVA researchers note that it could be a useful treatment for appropriate patients, especially considering the limited effectiveness of existing treatments.
They are urging larger trials to better understand the monoclonal antibody’s potential benefits.
“We are indebted to the patients at UVA who consented to participate in this study, without even knowing if they would receive the medicine or placebo, as they are the ones who have advanced our understanding of the pandemic,” Sasson said.
Findings Published
The researchers have published their findings in the scientific journal Open Forum of Infectious Diseases.
The research team consisted of Sasson, Alexandra N. Donlan, Jennie Z. Ma, Heather M. Haughey, Rachael Coleman, Uma Nayak, Amy J. Mathers, Sylvain Laverdure, Robin Dewar, Patrick Jackson, Scott K. Heysell, Jeffrey M. Sturek and William A. Petri Jr.
The researchers had no financial interest in dupilumab.
The work was supported by the Virginia Biosciences Health Research Corp., PBM C19 Research (a COVID-19 research entity of the Paul Manning Foundation), the Henske Family Foundation and by National Institutes of Health grants R01 AI124214, T32 AI007496, T32 DK072922/ TL1 DK132771, UL1TR003015 and KL2TR003016.
The research also drew on resources funded by the National Institutes of Health’s National Cancer Institute under contract 75N91019D00024.
The content of the publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of Health and Human Services, nor does mention of trade names, commercial products or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. government.
To keep up with the latest medical research news from UVA, subscribe to the Making of Medicine blog.
“Code yellow!”
someone screamed.
I dipped in and out of consciousness, in and out of panic.
advertisement
Eighteen years as a nurse myself and I knew one thing for sure: It was a burst ectopic.
The fetus was not viable.
I had lost a lot of blood.
I could die.
As I contemplated the possibility of never waking up after surgery, my nurse leaned in close, took my hand, and said, “It’s OK.
I’m here and you’re going to be OK.”
advertisement
Another sad thought then occurred to me: It had been years since I’d been able to offer that kind of compassionate care to one of my own patients.
I was so burned out that, when my nurse reached for my hand, my knee-jerk reaction was to pull away.
I was not used to being cared for.
My skin had become too thick, a coat of armor that protected me from the piercing stories of loss and grief that punctuate the lives of those who work in health care.
Nurse.
It’s such an evocative word, both a noun and a verb.
It is something we nurses live every day — a healing action of courageous care that we offer to our patients from the depths of our humanity.
When I woke up from surgery, the years of work — of really difficult grieving and personal reckoning — that followed helped me learn a simple lesson: You can’t pour from an empty cup.
I’ve been thinking about this a lot now that the Biden administration and health officials are telling us that Covid is over.
Now what happens to the nurses, doctors, the techs, the dietary staff, and environmental services who are still holding the bag of grief and trauma that they carried for these three years?
Many cultures have mourning rituals that help those who have lost to process and grieve.
Jews sit shiva.
Middle Eastern cultures hire professional wailers who pay homage to the deceased through weeping, singing, and lamentation.
Some cultures wear a memento mori (Latin for “remember that you must die”), a token that memorializes the deceased.
And in most cultures, those who have lost are given time — some 12 days, or 40, or 49 — during which they are surrounded by family and loved ones while they mourn, and process, grieve, and, most of all, remember.
But there is no place where health care workers can collectively mourn, grieve, and remember.
The very real repercussions of post-Covid burnout are starting to show.
A study recently found that 100,000 nurses left the workforce during the pandemic.
This is something we nurses have seen throughout the past three years.
But now it’s backed up by numbers.
So, where do we go from here?
How do we help frontline workers begin to heal?
I’ve spent a lot of time thinking about healing — about resilience.
I lost my mother to cancer when she was only 49.
My brother passed away at 30.
At the age of 26, my young sister, then a vivacious and healthy mother to an 8-year-old daughter, became, and remains, a quadriplegic.
After every loss, I found myself unable to “bounce back,” unable to “just be strong.”
I felt guilty and angry about it.
I had no idea whom to turn to for help or support, so I turned to the only thing that allows me to soften and grieve my losses while also experiencing my joy and comfort: dance.
When my sister became ill 10 years ago, I was working my way through an MFA in dance while also moonlighting as a nurse in the ER.
I took a break from school and work, and moved into her hospital room with her.
And in that tiny, darkly lit room, I rediscovered my own healing powers — not as a nurse, this time, but as a human.
My sister’s favorite song was “Party in the U.S.A.” by Miley Cyrus, which I would blast for her — ad nauseam — while dancing around the room and making a fool of myself to make her laugh.
She couldn’t speak, but she could still laugh.
When I eventually went back to grad school, I wanted to chase that laughter — a communication so pure that it didn’t fail my sister even when everything else did.
I’d long realized that dancing, that moving our bodies and playing, brings us back to a place of childhood innocence and enthusiasm.
There’s plenty of research that tells us exactly that: Music relieves anxiety.
Moving — whether through dance, exercise, or walking — is a balm for the soul.
And I had a hunch that bringing people who needed to grieve together to play, to dance, would create a space where they could heal, too.
The “workshops” began in 2016 when a few nurse friends joined me to move, cry, play, reflect, talk, be silly, and discover a little relief in sharing something with someone who knows, who gets it.
We curated music that helped us soften.
At one point we played “Eye of the Tiger” over and over again as we danced around, laughing so hard at the unexpected silliness of the moment that we cried.
I told everyone that the workshops were therapeutic but not therapy, so there was no expectation to share, to talk, to process.
Yet everyone did because of the camaraderie we created.
Kaiser Permanente nurses in California participate in a workshop.
Courtesy Drummond West
After one of these early workshops, one nurse pulled me aside to tearfully explain that she hadn’t realized how much grief she’d been carrying around in her body until she put it down.
A burden shared is one halved, as they say — especially when you’re sharing with kindred spirits.
We continued to meet monthly all the way up until Covid — and then we had to get creative.
We met virtually and in parks, sharing our voices and our Covid stories with each other and the streets of Denver.
During a time when the world was calling us “superheroes,” we had created a space where we could talk about how we didn’t feel like heroes at all.
We were scared, angry, raw, and vulnerable.
Dancing together allowed us to share these truths about what it was like to be putting ourselves at risk when the rest of the world was on lockdown.
Doing this work together really reaffirmed that we heal in relationship with others — we could honor ourselves and one another in a way our hospitals and communities didn’t know how to do.
Looking back now, I realize that nurses are something much greater than superheroes: We are humans who care and hold the fragile humanity of our patients in our hands daily.
We are worthy of being cared for, just as we care for others.
The Clinic, as it’s now called, has come a long way since those workshops.
In research approved by an institutional review board that we hope to publish in the next year, we found that the workshops decreased burnout, secondary traumatic stress, and turnover, and increased empathy, self-compassion, and satisfaction.
Since Covid, hundreds of nurses and other health care providers across the U.S. and Europe have taken part to process their grief and remember their joy.
This summer, more than 500 Kaiser Permanente nurses in Northern California will join me for these dance sessions.
At a local hospital in Denver, I’m training peer responders in hospitals to create collective grieving spaces through arts and play workshops.
I will be working with their peer support teams that offer 24-hour psychological first aid and other innovative peer support modalities.
These spaces are vital to our healing, individually, collectively, and for the nursing profession as a whole.
But dancing isn’t the only way to offer nurses spaces to feel their emotions and tell the truth about who they are and what they need.
Wyoming health care workers take songwriting workshops to express burnout creatively while their counterparts in Washington, D.C., are using knitting as a creative outlet for stress.
The Nocturnists is a celebration of storytelling as a way to process trauma and burnout.
These are meaningful grassroots efforts to address a very real need, and every health care system should welcome and nurture them.
To be well — to care well — we need more than just free pizza for lunch.
Free pizza doesn’t raise morale.
Feeling seen and cared for — listened to and not dispensable — is what raises morale.
Of course, these workshops are no substitute for nurses being paid more.
But they are an example of the kind of ongoing, sustainable, innovative mental health and wellness support that reaches beyond the typical employee assistance program.
These workshops and other support should be embedded in nurses’ workdays, not an addition they need to take on, on top of all they are doing.
How we process the past three years will hinge on whether these systems decide to prioritize our mental health, whether they’re farsighted enough to see the impending mass exodus from health care due to burnout and pandemic-related trauma, and whether they are willing to invest both financially and personally in new efforts.
For too long, health care systems have taken advantage of values-driven people who continue to care because they see the need.
We continue to care past what is healthy, past what we can handle, and this pandemic has taken many of us to the brink.
They must stop exploiting our tender hearts and begin supporting them.
Tara Rynders, MFA, BSN, B.A., R.N., is a registered nurse, dancer, and founder of The Clinic, a compassionate collaborative that combines arts, music, movement, and caring science to create immersive experiences and workshops for health care professionals.
Physicians may be grappling in the dark when trying to diagnose psychiatric symptoms in patients with long COVID.
Half the dues, all the AMA benefits!
AMA membership offers unique access to savings and resources tailored to enrich the personal and professional lives of physicians, residents and medical students.
Learn More
“Most of our patients don’t fit into one neat box,” said former AMA President Patrice A. Harris, MD, MA, a board-certified child and adolescent psychiatrist.
Former AMA President Patrice A. Harris, MD, MA.
Symptoms aren’t clear-cut, and studies addressing psychiatric problems and prolonged viral symptoms have yielded inconsistent results.
Physicians can do their part by actively looking for psychiatric comorbidities in long COVID patients, noted Dr. Harris, who addressed the topic during an education session at the 2022 AMA Interim Meeting in Honolulu.
They should also be partnering with psychiatrists in the community to increase access to treatment and work with systems to address health inequities, “so that everyone can have treatment opportunities where they live,” said Dr. Harris.
Numbers “are all over the place” Numbers “are all over the place”
Post-acute SARS-CoV-2, often called long COVID syndrome, continues to be an ongoing health issue concern in the U.S.—especially as new virus variants emerge.
It’s difficult to gauge long-term consequences because the disease has only been around since 2020, noted Dr. Harris.
Specifically for neuropsychiatric sequelae related to long COVID, the data is very heterogenous.
Related Coverage COVID-19’s impact ripples across 18 conditions after initial illness
“Numbers are all over the place,” she said.
Some studies say that 13% of long COVID patients develop mental health problems; others say 20%.
Data on emergence of symptoms is also inconsistent.
The strongest studies to date say neuropsychiatric symptoms develop four to six months after acute infection, said Dr. Harris.
It is also unclear to what extent mental health symptoms are related to severity and duration of illness, she continued.
“We can’t make that one-to-one correlation.”
Find out what doctors wish patients knew about long COVID.
Symptoms affect quality of life Symptoms affect quality of life
Vague presentation of neuropsychiatric sequelae makes it challenging to arrive at a diagnosis.
Mental health symptoms may be exacerbating previous symptoms or represent a new onset of symptoms, said Dr. Harris.
Physicians often look for new onset anxiety disorder or depressed mood in long COVID patients.
Patients who had been controlling psychiatric symptoms with medication might suddenly see an exacerbation in their post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, depression or bipolar disorder.
Some patients with PTSD are so distressed they may stop working or develop suicidal thoughts.
Fatigue, confusion and poor sleep often accompany psychiatric symptoms.
“Patients feel like they’re walking through a fog,” said Dr. Harris.
Misuse and exacerbation of substance-use disorders have also been reported.
“We must not underestimate the impact of the collective, community and individual trauma related to the pandemic,” she added.
“The key is to have your antenna up to look for these symptoms in your patients,” advised Dr. Harris.
Learn about HHS reports detailing plans to boost care, research on long COVID.
Partnering with psychiatrists Partnering with psychiatrists
Dr. Harris urged physicians to become ambassadors in their communities.
This involves partnering with psychiatric colleagues “because we’re going to be facing worsening lack of access at the time we need it the most,” she cautioned.
Health inequities have come into sharp focus during COVID, with communities of color being hard hit.
“When you partner with your psychiatric colleagues, please think about health inequities and what you can do to work with these communities and ensure they get treatment,” she said.
Physicians should be using tools such as the patient health questionnaire (PHQ-9 and PHQ-2) to screen for depression, anxiety or PTSD.
“When it comes to treatment, we’ve seen some success with cognitive behavioral therapy,” said Dr. Harris.
The problem is there’s a lack of therapists with this type of training, she added.
Educating patients on digital health apps is also important.
Many apps for mental health exist, but not all are effective and some are dangerous.
The American Psychiatric Association has a tool that guides patients on app usage.
Patients should be aware of confidentiality issues and whether these apps are selling their data, said Dr. Harris.
More than two years into COVID-19, odds are you've probably used an at-home test.
Whether it be to join your extended family for a holiday meal, test your kids as they return to activities or to travel confidently, we all have experience with rapid at-home testing.
Millions of our at-home tests are used by families around the world, which is why our scientists and teams are committed to continuing to develop tests that can be trusted and are widely available.
But we didn't stop at availability.
Our teams evaluated the packaging of our rapid antigen tests and continued to innovate to make the best better.
Why?
Because we're never satisfied until both our communities and our planet have an experience that is truly centered around their needs.
In the coming weeks, you’ll notice that both our BinaxNOW and Panbio COVID-19 Self Tests packaging have changed, in the U.S. and outside the U.S. respectively.
All changes are to improve portability, functionality and ease of use all while continuing to deliver fast, reliable and accurate results, in the comfort of home or point-of-care.
Not to worry, the tests themselves, how they run, and the technology powering them has not changed.
Here are the changes we made, why we made them and how they’ll impact you.
Changes to U.S. At-Home Tests
BinaxNOW COVID-19 Self Test packaging is now 31% smaller than the original packaging.
We removed the plastic tray inside the packaging to reduce waste.
This also helped us have a smaller overall packaging.
We combined the multiple fact sheets down to one to reduce paper.
Changes to International At-Home Tests
Panbio COVID-19
Antigen Self-Test packaging is up to 33% smaller and 20% lighter than the original packaging.
We also replaced the buffer bottle with a pre-filled extraction tube.
This removes an entire step of the testing process, making it more efficient and easier to follow.
We shortened the nasal swab, minimizing waste while also decreasing intimidation with shallow nasal collection and improving the overall test experience.
We removed the plastic tray– which helped to reduce waste and create a smaller box size.
Small Changes Make a Big Impact
Our 2030 Sustainability Plan is focused on building a healthier future for all, including protecting a healthy environment, as we build a stronger, more sustainable Abbott for years to come.
These changes made to BinaxNOW and Panbio COVID-19 Antigen Self-Tests help reduce materials needed and reduce overall waste, part of our broader focus on reducing the environmental impact of our product packaging.
By 2030, we're working to address 50 million pounds of packaging through high-impact sustainable design programs like our work with BinaxNOW and Panbio.
COVID-19 has significantly impacted our world in many different ways.
Sustainability doesn't have to be one of them.
These changes might seem small, and some might not even be noticed.
But over time, these small changes can have a big impact.
And when that impact improves not only our environment, but our users' experience with our technology, small changes are well worth the effort.
You'll notice these packaging changes over the course of the next few weeks when you purchase self-tests at your local retailer.
Activity Overview
Intended Audience:
Interprofessional healthcare teams (infectious diseases physicians, pulmonologists, critical care specialists, NPs/PAs, nurses, pharmacists) who are at the frontlines of caring for hospitalized patients with COVID-19
COVID-19 continues to be a public health concern, particularly among people requiring hospitalization for whom pharmacological treatments remain limited.
Tune in to hear experts in infectious diseases and pulmonary and critical care join forces to share their unique practice perspectives and:
Review the immunopathogenesis of COVID-19 as a basis for pharmacological therapies
Examine the latest clinical data and guidelines for inpatient COVID-19 treatment
Incorporate available evidence and patient characteristics into individualized treatment strategies through case-based discussion
The pandemic has been a disaster for human rights, but I think the hardest part of it is watching institutions fade away and kind of give up.
It’s a huge challenge to be entering the third year of an era-defining pandemic and have so many health authorities simply shrugging at it: the US Center for Disease Control has basically given up on any sense of equitable protections.
But the pandemic is also fundamentally changing how the world works, even if authorities want to ignore it.
How can it not?
For example, we have the wealthiest country in the history of humanity – the United States – delivering such a negligent Covid response, that there has been over a million deaths despite nearly unparalleled resources at the government’s fingertips.
That kind of thing really inverts the “developed/developing world” way of thinking and makes us consider the details of how governance is carried out.
We also have to look at the first three years of the Covid-19 pandemic and realize that its most important global policy debate – the debate over intellectual property as it related to vaccines, testing, and treatment – took place inside a commerce body, the World Trade Organization (WTO), with no health or human rights mandate.
These are just two examples that raise significant questions about whether the current dominance of market-driven and capitalist systems are fit for purpose when it comes to upholding the right to health.
Can we really look at the current patent system for medicines, which primarily protects private sector interests, and then look at a map of the dismal vaccine coverage in poor countries, and think that things are working?
The bottom line is that the pandemic isn’t over, and authorities saying it’s over doesn’t make it so.
The burden of infections, illnesses, and deaths are shifting onto predictable lines of marginalized and vulnerable communities.
This isn’t surprising, but it’s entirely preventable: it’s indeed part of governments’ human rights obligations to work against it.
One major question is whether the WHO will continue the pandemic phase or declare the emergency over, and what that will mean for the future of Covid, global health, trust in institutions, and protection of fundamental rights.
Patient recruitment and ethics
Enrolment of patients into this study was based on the deficiency of particular genes of interest (IEI: CTLA4, LRBA, NFKB1, NFKB2) or clinical diagnostics (ICB, n = 19), whilst healthy controls for this study were enroled based on their clinical healthy status (n = 10).
Sample-size calculation was limited due to IEI patients in the study (n = 9) reflect a rare population of individuals within the general population that we were able to recruit (Supplementary Table 3).
The research was conducted in accordance with the principles of Good Clinical Practice and following approved protocols of the NIHR National Bioresource.
Samples were collected with the written informed consent of all study participants under the NIHR National BioResource - Research Tissue Bank (NBR-RTB) ethics (REC:17/EE/0025) or under the Barts and the London Immunology Registry (REC: 11/LO/1689).
Clinical data were collected by Clinical Immunology Consultants at Cambridge University Hospital and Bart’s Health via the Electronic Healthcare Record (Epic), or direct patient contact.
The patients and healthy controls were consented under the East of England Cambridge South national research ethics committee (REC) reference 13/EE/0325 or Barts and the London Immunology Registry (REC: 11/LO/1689).
Blood donation and separation
Patients and controls gave voluntary blood samples prior to second dose and at early (day 8), mid (day 21) and late (day 105) timepoints following their second BNT162b2 vaccine.
Where sample size of individual assays was not the same as the total sample size, this was because there was no sample collection at those specific time points.
Samples may have also been excluded if there was serological evidence of prior exposure to SARS-CoV-2.
Peripheral blood samples were acquired in either lithium heparin or serum separating tubes.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by a density gradient centrifugation protocol and stored at −80 °C for up to a week before being transferred to liquid nitrogen until use.
Whilst serum tubes were centrifuged to separate serum from cell pellet before being aliquoted and stored at −80 °C until use.
Single cell library preparation and sequencing
Frozen PBMCs were thawed and B cell population was enriched using magnetic separation (Miltenyi 130-101-638).
Samples were next labelled with oligonucleotide-tagged antibodies against CD11c, CD21, CD27 and CD85j (TotalSeq, BioLegend).
After labelled, cell counts were adjusted to 1035 cells per microlitre before being loaded onto a Chromium Next GEM chip K (10X Genomics, 2000182) for the subsequent 5’ Gene Expression and V(D)J libraries’ construction according to Single cell 5’ v2 protocol (CG000330 RevA, 10X Genomics).
The library was quality controlled by Agilent 4150 TapeStation and quantified by RT-PCR using the KAPA library quantification kit for Illumina platforms (Roche, KK4824).
Samples were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq with a sequencing depth of at least 50, 000 reads per cell.
Software versions
Single cell transcriptome and VDJ data was analysed using Cell Ranger software version 6.1.1 and 7.0.1 respectively, citeseq version 1.5.0, R version 4.0.3 and R packages (Seurat 4.1.0, SeuratObject 4.0.4, Scuttle 1.0.4, rstatix 0.7.0, tidyverse 1.3.0 and dplyr 1.0.8) and python packages (dandelion 0.3.0, pandas 1.1.3, numpy 1.19.2, networkx 2.5, scipy 1.5.2, blast 2.11.0, igblast 1.17.1, anndata 0.7.6, scanpy 1.7.2, changeo 1.0.2 and airr 1.3.1).
Flow cytometry data and antibody titres were analysed using FlowJo 10.7.1 and GraphPad Prism 9.1.2 (225), respectively.
FCS files were analysed using FlowJo 10.7.2.
Additionally, a uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) algorithm for dimensional reduction was performed on a concatenated FCS file comprising events from the CD19+ gate, utilising the UMAP FlowJo plugin (v3.1).
XShift (v1.4.1) and ClusterExplorer (1.5.15) plugins were used for unsupervised cluster generation and exploration, respectively.
Figures were produced using ggplot2 3.3.5, gridExtra 2.3, ComplexHeatmap 2.6.2, Nebulosa 1.0.2, RColorBrewer 1.1-2, ggrepel 0.9.1, ggpubr 0.4.0, scales 1.1.1, showtext 0.9-5 in R, GraphPad Prism 9.1.2 (225) and FlowJo 10.7.1.
Preprocessing of scRNA-seq transcriptome data
Raw FASTQ files of the gene expression library were analysed using 10x Genomics Cell Ranger software v.6.1.157 and aligned to the GRCh38 genome provided by Cell Ranger.
All Ig V, D, J and constant genes as well as TCR genes were deleted from the dataset so that downstream analysis is not affected by highly variable clonotype genes.
For the quantification of antibody derived tags (ADT) and oligo hashtags, citeseq pipeline v.1.5.058 was used.
The generated hashtag count matrices as well as raw gene expression count matrices were then used as inputs for the Seurat package v.4.1.059 in R v.4.0.3.
Seurat objects were created from the corresponding transcript count matrices.
ADT assays were added using CreateAssayObject function of Seurat to include expression levels of surface proteins.
Samples were then demultiplexed using HTODemux function.
Doublets and cells with no assigned hashtag were removed from objects for further analysis.
Scuttle package v.1.0.460 was used for quality control.
3 x Median absolute deviation (MAD) was considered as the threshold for quality control; number of features and number of read counts were filtered from both sides, whereas percentage of mitochondrial genes was filtered from upper side.
The samples were log-normalised for further differential expression analysis.
Before integrating all objects, they were normalised based on regularised negative binomial regression using the SCTransform function of the Seurat package, regressing out for cell cycle scores, number of counts and percentage of mitochondrial genes.
The objects were then integrated using the integration protocol of the Seurat package to perform batch effect correction.
The objects used for integration include: four groups of healthy controls each having two participants (total of 26900 cells in the final dataset), one group of IEI patients (5345 cells in the final dataset) and two groups of ICB patients (total of 9751 cells in the final dataset) each having four participants, and SLE patients with 3 participants (10406 cells in the final dataset).
SLE data
Data of SLE patients from Bhamidipati et al.33 were downloaded from GSE163121, reprocessed and integrated with other objects using the same procedure as described above.
Clustering of data
Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the integrated object to reduce the dimensionality of the dataset.
First, clustering was done using 30 principal components (PCs) and resolution parameter of 0.1.
Clusters with a high expression of non-B cell markers were removed from the dataset.
After deletion of all non-B cells, the dataset consists of 52402 cells.
PCs were calculated in the new dataset and unsupervised clustering was performed using 20 PCs and resolution parameter of 1.4.
Cluster markers were calculated with the default parameters of the FindMarkers function.
Clusters with similar markers were manually merged.
Final clusters were labelled based on the differentially expressed genes in each cluster.
Gene ontology enrichment analysis
Gene ontology61,62 enrichment analysis was performed via PANTHER63 from http://www.geneontology.org using the list of significantly upregulated genes from classical ABC cluster (Average log2 fold change > 0.25 and percent expressed in each group > 0.25).
Processing of scRNA-seq VDJ data
Raw FASTQ files of the VDJ library were analysed using the 10x Genomics Cell Ranger software v7.0.1 and aligned to the VDJ GRCh38 genome provided by Cell Ranger.
The Dandelion package was then used for analysis of clonal expansion in different clusters38,39.
Using dandelion V/D/J genes were re-annotated, heavy V gene alleles and constant region calls were re-assigned and cells with poor quality contigs were filtered64,65.
Clones were defined based on following criterion:
i. usage of the same V and J genes ii.
identical CDR3 sequence length iii. minimum of 85% sequence similarity between CDR3 sequences based on hamming distance
Dandelion was then used for generating a tree-like network for each clone based on the similarities of the full VDJ contig sequences.
Vertex/node Gini index was calculated as a measure of clonal expansion in different clusters37.
For calculating Gini index, dandelion merges identical BCRs into one node in the BCR network and the number of merged nodes is counted.
The degree index from dandelion was also calculated as a measure of how many cells are connected to an individual cell in the clonal network.
Both indices can vary between 0 and 1.
Geneset scores
A list of 74 Aire-induced genes were obtained from Yamano et al.41, after converting mouse gene IDs to human gene IDs (Supplementary Table 2).
For calculating gene set score for each cell, AddModuleScore function from Seurat package was used.
Briefly, average expression of genes in each cell is calculated and is subtracted by the aggregated expression of control gene sets.
For selecting control gene sets, genes are first binned.
Then, for each gene, control gene sets are randomly chosen from the same expression bin as that gene, so that they have similar expression patterns to Aire target genes.
To explore the expression pattern of these genes in different tissues, normalised transcript per million (nTPM) values were extracted in different immune cells and different tissues from the human protein atlas website (https://v22.proteinatlas.org/download/rna_immune_cell.tsv.zip and https://v22.proteinatlas.org/download/rna_tissue_consensus.tsv.zip, respectively).
In addition to two groups of B lymphocytes, those tissues and cells that have maximum expression of at least one of the genes from our list were kept.
Kernel density estimation of gene expression
Nebulosa package v 1.0.266 was used for calculating and plotting gene-weighted density estimation of AIRE expression.
SARS-CoV-2 serology
A Luminex bead-based immunoassay was used to quantify specific antibodies to full-length trimeric spike (S), spike receptor binding domain (RBD) and nucleocapsid (NCP) of SARS-CoV-2 as previously described67,68.
Briefly, a multiplex assay was established by covalently coupling recombinant SARS-CoV-2 proteins to distinct carboxylated bead sets (Luminex, Netherlands).
The S protein used here was the S-R/PP described in Xiong et al.67, and the RBD protein was described by Stadlbauer et al.69.
The NCP protein used is a truncated construct of the SARS-CoV-2 NCP protein comprising residues 48–365 (both ordered domains with the native linker) with an N terminal uncleavable hexahistidine tag.
NCP was expressed in E. Coli using autoinducing media for 7 h at 37 °C and purified using immobilised metal affinity chromatography (IMAC), size exclusion and heparin chromatography.
The S-, RBD- and NCP-coupled bead sets were incubated with patient sera at 3 dilutions (1/100, 1/1000, 1/10000) for 1 h in 96-well filter plates (MultiScreen HTS; Millipore) at room temperature in the dark on a horizontal shaker.
After washes, beads were incubated for 30 min with a PE-labelled anti-human IgG-Fc antibody (Leinco/Biotrend), washed as described above, and resuspended in 100 μl PBS/Tween.
Antibody-specific binding was interpreted using Exponent Software V31 software on the Luminex analyzer (Luminex/R&D Systems) and reported as mean fluorescence intensity (MFI).
The diagnostic thresholds used adhered to UK national guidelines.
Neutralising antibodies to SARS-CoV-2
The SARS-CoV-2 used in this study was a wildtype (lineage B) virus (SARS-CoV-2/human/Liverpool/REMRQ0001/2020), a kind gift from Ian Goodfellow (University of Cambridge), isolated early in the COVID-19 pandemic by Lance Turtle (University of Liverpool) and David Matthews and Andrew Davidson (University of Bristol)70,71,72 from a patient on the Diamond Princess cruise ship.
Luminescent HEK293T-ACE2-30F-PLP2 reporter cells (clone B7) expressing ACE2 and SARS-CoV-2 Papain-like protease-activatable circularly permuted firefly luciferase
(FFluc) are available from the National Institute for Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC, www.nibsc.org, catalogue number 101062)48.
Sera were heat-inactivated at 56 °C for 30 min before use, and neutralising antibody titres at 50% inhibition (NT 50s ) measured as previously described48,73.
In brief, luminescent HEK293T-ACE2-30F-PLP2 reporter cells were seeded in flat-bottomed 96-well plates.
The next day, SARS-CoV-2 viral stock (MOI = 0.01) was pre-incubated with a 3-fold dilution series of each serum for 2 h at 37 °C, then added to the cells.
16 h post-infection, cells were lysed in Bright-Glo Luciferase Buffer (Promega) diluted 1:1 with PBS and 1% NP-40, and FFluc activity measured by luminometry.
Experiments were conducted in duplicate.
To obtain NT 50s , titration curves were plotted as FFluc vs log (serum dilution), then analysed by non-linear regression using the Sigmoidal, 4PL, X is log(concentration) function in GraphPad Prism.
NT 50s were reported when (1) at least 50% inhibition was observed at the lowest serum dilution tested (1:20), and (2) a sigmoidal curve with a good fit was generated.
For purposes of visualisation and ranking, samples for which visual inspection of the titration curve indicated inhibition at low dilutions, but which did not meet criteria (1) and (2) above, were assigned an arbitrary NT 50 of 4.
World Health Organisation International Standard 20/136 (WHO IS 20/136) has an NT50 of 1967 against wildtype SARS-CoV-2 when measured in this assay74.
This standard comprises pooled convalescent plasma obtained from 11 individuals which, when reconstituted, is assigned an arbitrary neutralising capacity of 1000 IU/ml against early 2020 SARS-CoV-2 isolates75.
NT 50s from this study may therefore be converted to IU/ml using a calibration factor of 1000/1967 (0.51), with a limit of quantitation of 10.2 IU/ml (corresponding to an NT 50 of 20).
Flow cytometric analysis
Frozen PBMCs were thawed and stained with specific antibody cocktails (Supplementary Table 4).
All samples were acquired on the BD LSRFortessa using FACSDIVA software (BD-Biosciences).
FCS files were exported and analysed using FlowJo
v10.7.2 (BD-Biosciences) software.
Additionally, a uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) algorithm for dimensional reduction was performed on a concatenated FCS file comprising events from the CD19+ gate from HC, IEI and ICB samples analysed, utilising the UMAP FlowJo plugin (v3.1).
The composite samples were gated as indicated on Supplementary Figures for RBD+ B cell identification and then overlaid by study group in the UMAP generated, for additional visualisation.
XShift (v1.4.1) and ClusterExplorer (1.5.15) plugins were used for unsupervised cluster generation and exploration, respectively.
Class-switched memory B cells and plasmablasts/plasma cells were selected based on the expression of CD19+IgD-IgM-CD38-CD27+ and CD19+IgD-IgM-CD38+/highCD27+/high, respectively.
RBD tetramer production
SARS-CoV-2 RBD was expressed with N-terminal fusion of His-Zbasic-TEV module (8×His tag, Zbasic domain76 and TEV protease cleavage site) and C-terminal Avi-tag in BL21(DE3) cells (Novagen) cultured in 2xYT media at 37 °C.
RBD containing inclusion bodies were isolated and solubilised.
The denatured protein was first purified by immobilised metal affinity chromatography using PureCube Ni-NTA resin, eluted and refolding was allowed to proceed for 72 h at 4 °C.
N-terminal fusion tag was cleaved off by NHis-TEVpro (produced in-house).
Biotinylation of the RBD protein was carried out using 5 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM ATP, 150 µM biotin and 50 µg/ml of biotin ligase BirA-CHis (produced in-house).
The excess of biotinylated RBD protein was then incubated with 0.5 mg/ml of fluorescently labelled Streptavidin (BioLegend) for 1 h at room temperature and, finally, RBD-Streptavidin complexes were separated by size exclusion chromatography using a Superdex 200 Increase 10/300 GL column (Cytiva).
The RBD-Streptavidin complexes were then analysed by SDS-PAGE.
Immune complex binding assay
Immune complexes were generated by incubation of 2 µg of human immunoglobulins (Biolegend 422302) with 1 µg of Alexa Fluor 647 AffiniPure Rabbit Anti-Human IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch 309-605-006) for 1 h at room temperature and diluted 1 in 10 before cell binding.
Immune complex size was analysed by means of hydrodynamic radius (R h ) measured by Microfluidic Diffusional Sizing (MDS) on a Fluidity One-W (Fluidic Analytics) instrument.
Thawed PBMCs were or not incubated with Fc block for 30 min before interaction with ICs for 10 min at room temperature.
After immune complex binding, PBMCs were fixed with PFA at 1% for 30 min and then washed.
After fixation, PBMCs were stained with a B cell antibody cocktail panel for surface labelling.
All samples were acquired on the BD LSRFortessa using FACSDIVA software (BD-Biosciences).
FCS files were exported and analysed using FlowJo
v10.7.2 (BD-Biosciences) software.
In vitro cytokine analysis
Frozen PBMCs were thawed and activated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA; 50 ng/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) and Ionomycin (1 µM, Sigma-Aldrich) for 5 h at 37 °C.
Inhibitor of intracellular protein transport, Brefeldin A (eBioscience), was added to cells at the start of stimulation.
Cells incubated with vehicle (DMSO) and Brefeldin A were used as unstimulated controls.
Cytokines production was analysed by flow cytometry.
Briefly, cells were incubated with LIVE/DEAD fixable Aqua dead cell stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Fc block, followed by cell-surface marker staining.
Cells were then fixed and permeabilised using fixation/permeabilization buffer (BD Biosciences).
Antibodies to stain intracellular cytokines were added and incubated for 30 min at room temperature.
All samples were acquired on the BD LSRFortessa using FACSDIVA software (BD-Biosciences).
FCS files were exported and analysed using FlowJo
v10.7.2 (BD-Biosciences) software.
T cell cytokine production by ELISpot
Samples were assessed at day 105 after 2nd dose BNT162b2 immunisation.
Frozen PBMCs were thawed and rested for 2–3 h in RPMI media supplemented with 10% (v/v) Human AB Serum (Sigma) and 1% (v/v) Penicillin/Streptomycin (Sigma) at 37 °C.
Plates precoated (Mabtech ELISpot
Plus: Human IFN-γ (ALP), 3420-4APT-10) with capture antibody (Mabtech, mAb 1-D1K) were washed three times with PBS and then blocked with supplemented RPMI media at 37 °C for 1–2
h. Overlapping peptide pools (18-mers with 10 amino acid overlap.
Mimotopes) representing the spike (S), Membrane (M) or nucleocapsid (N) SARS-CoV-2 proteins were added to 200,000 PBMCs/well at a final concentration of 2 µg/ml.
Concanavalin A (Sigma) was used as positive control.
DMSO (Sigma) was used as the negative control at the equivalent concentration to the peptides.
Plates were incubated at 37 °C, for 18 h. Wells were washed with PBS 0.05% (v/v) Tween (Sigma) seven times before incubation for 2 h at room temperature with the ELISpot PLUS kit biotinylated detection antibody (clone 7-B6-1) at 1 µg/ml.
Wells were washed and then incubated with the ELISpot PLUS kit streptavidin-ALP at 1 µg/ml for 1 h at room temperature.
Wells were washed and colour development was carried out using 1-step NBT/BCIP Substrate Solution, for 5 min at room temperature.
Colour development was stopped by washing the plates with cold tap water.
Plates were left to air dry for 48 h and then scanned and analysed using the AID iSpot Spectrum ELISpot reader (software version 7.0, Autoimmune Diagnostika GmbH, Germany).
The average spot count of the control wells was subtracted from the test wells for each sample to quantify the antigen-specific responses.
Results are expressed as spot forming units (SFU) per 106 PBMCs.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis for FACS and serology data was performed using GraphPad Prism v9.1.1 (GraphPad Prism Software Inc).
Two-tailed non-parametric Mann–Whitney tests were used to determine differences between groups.
For multiple comparisons ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test was used.
Associations were calculated using two-tailed Spearman’s rank correlations and results are shown with linear trend levels.
For the single cell data, statistical significance for paired comparisons were performed using Wilcoxon rank sum test in R.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Florida GOP lawmakers are looking to restrict face mask coverings, proof of COVID-19 vaccinations and COVID-19 tests at private businesses, governmental agencies and public and private schools, based on “discrimination” — though Democrats have argued that the safety of others need to be in consideration as well.
The bill, HB 1013, states that “it is the intent of the Legislature that Floridians be free from facial covering and COVID-19 vaccination mandates of any kind and discrimination based on COVID-19 vaccination or post infection recovery status or refusal to take a COVID-19 test.”
The bill comes at a time when Florida law is set to expire on June 1, on mask and vaccine mandates.
In January, Gov. Ron DeSantis indicated he would push to permanently ban mask mandates and COVID-19 vaccination requirements at schools and businesses, the Phoenix previously reported.
Over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, preventative measures such as wearing face masks and issuing vaccine mandates have been an ongoing and drawn-out political debate.
Republican lawmakers have largely argued that individuals should have the right to make their own health care decisions without government intervention, while Democrats have argued in favor of local governments and businesses to make decisions about face masks and vaccines.
The bill sponsor, Rep. Philip Wayne Griffitts, said at a Health and Human Services committee Monday that people have been “discriminated” against due to their medical decisions for choosing not to pursue recommended COVID prevention methods such as vaccination or face masks.
“I don’t believe were talking about science in this bill — were talking about discriminatory practices,” he told the House committee.
Griffitts is a Republican who represents Bay County in the Florida Panhandle.
“The science over this has changed dramatically over the last two years.
I think we have people that were pro-vaccination and now are non-vaccine people,” Griffitts claims.
“We’ve known that things have changed dramatically over the last two years and we have to take that into account.
All this is doing is taking the discriminatory practices off of what we’ve learned over the last two years.”
HB 1013 was approved by the House Health and Human Services committee Monday, with Democrats in opposition of the measure, arguing that the bill is governmental overreach on how private employers conduct business regarding their customers and employees.
Rep. Ashley Gantt, a Democrat who represents part of Miami-Dade County, referenced a rapidly progressing 6-week abortion ban in comparison to imposing a mask mandate.
“The same body has a bill that is trying to tell a woman what to do with her body — but we say it’s discriminatory with asking a person to wear a mask.
I also fear that businesses will not be able to be private businesses, and run their business how they want because, we might be — for whatever reason — we do not like face masks.
But COVID is still very real.
People are still getting COVID.
“I cannot understand the rationale for making businesses adhere to something when it’s a private, privately-owned business,” she said.
House Health Committee Chair Randy Fine of Brevard County stated that the legislation does not infringe on an individual’s right to wear masks or get vaccinated for COVID.
In November 2021, well in the middle of the COVID-19 pandemic and shortly after vaccinations for COVID were approved, the Florida Legislature convened for a special session in order to prohibit strict vaccine mandates for Florida businesses and employers by providing expansive exemptions.
The special session also prohibited school districts from imposing mask mandates on students, even though the Florida Constitution gives school boards authority to operate schools, and several districts opted for strict mask mandates when COVID cases spiked earlier in the 2021-22 school year.
Right to choose
The bill also creates a “patient’s right to choose COVID-19 treatment alternatives,” and states that “a hospital may not interfere with a patient’s right to choose COVID-19 treatment alternatives as recommended by a health care practitioner with privileges at the hospital.”
According to a legislative staff analysis:
“The practitioner must explain the ‘alternative medications’ to treat COVID-19 the benefits and risks, sufficiently to allow the patient to make a ‘prudent’ decision, taking into account the patient’s physical state and ability to understand the information.”
HB 1013 says that a health care practitioner shall consider “any medications currently authorized or approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of COVID-19 and use his or her best clinical judgment to identify any alternative medications that could reasonably be expected to benefit the patient.”
Regarding the prohibition on mask requirements, there is a slight exception for health care settings, which says that state health agencies will develop rules regarding facial coverings in these areas.
Those agencies are the Agency for Health Care Administration and the Florida Department of Health, the latter of which answers to the Florida Surgeon General, Joe Ladapo.
Florida’s top health official has faced multiple backlashes regarding his statements on COVID-19.
Most recently, the Tampa Bay Times reported that Ladapo recommended in October that young men should not get the COVID-19 vaccine due to cardiac-related deaths, even though the state agency had data that contradicted his suggestion.
According to Tampa Bay Times, the DOH had data which indicated a COVID infection could increase the chances of a cardiac-related death much more than getting the vaccine, despite Ladapo’s recommendation.
Rep. Lindsay Cross, a Democrat who represents part of Pinellas County, says that the bill goes “way too far.”
“I think we’ve gotten to a point where we use science only when it serves our own best interest and the point that we wish to make,” Cross said in opposition of the bill.
Cross continued.
“There was an article that came out last week that shows that our surgeon general removed some information related to COVID-19 vaccines from, you know, official records.
I’m a trained scientist and… my schooling told me that you keep data in there even, if it doesn’t meet your original hypothesis,” Cross said.
The Florida House of Representative website says that she is an environmental scientist.
In January, Gov. Ron DeSantis indicated he would push to permanently ban mask mandates and COVID-19 vaccination requirements at schools and businesses, the Phoenix previously reported.
The new COVID-19 vaccines recently authorized for use as boosters generate an immune response not only to the original strain, but also two omicron subvariants.
UConn Health’s Dr. David Banach explains
What You Need to Know About Your Next COVID Booster
Copy Link
An updated version of the COVID-19 vaccine is now available, and with it comes the updated recommendation for another round of boosters.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration recently amended the emergency use authorization of both Pfizer and Moderna’s COVID-19 vaccines to include what’s known as a bivalent formulations to be offered as booster doses.
Dr. David Banach, infectious diseases physician and hospital epidemiologist at UConn Health, explains the significance of these updated boosters.
What’s the difference between the monovalent and bivalent vaccines?
The monovalent vaccines are the ones that have been available thus far.
They contain a small piece of the mRNA component of the virus based on the original SARS-CoV-2 virus, sometimes termed as the “ancestral strain,” and are designed to generate an immune response to that original virus.
We’ve seen with the omicron variant — and specifically with the BA.4 and BA.5 subvariants, which have appeared most recently — the virus has changed.
The bivalent vaccine contains both the portion of the original ancestral virus mRNA as well as a portion of mRNA that is specific for the BA.4 and BA.5 subvariants that have been circulating most recently.
The hope is, by more specifically targeting the most recent subvariants, the bivalent boosters will reduce the impact of COVID both on individuals who received them as well as the population.
Conceptually it’s analogous to what has been done with the influenza vaccine.
The technology’s a little different but it’s based on the same idea.
It’s targeted against both the original strain and the BA.4 and BA.5 subvariants of omicron.
What becomes of the monovalent vaccine?
At this time the vaccination program will be a primary vaccine series with the original monovalent vaccine and booster doses using the bivalent vaccine.
Why wouldn’t we just start people with the bivalent vaccine?
Data showed the monovalent vaccine upfront provides that high level of protection.
The bivalent vaccine has not been evaluated as a primary vaccine candidate, so we don’t have the data to support its use in that context.
That’s how it was originally designed, to be a booster.
What are the updated recommendations for who gets which booster(s) and when?
The recommendation from the ACIP (Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices), which was supported by the CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), was that a single dose of a bivalent vaccine is recommended for anyone 12 or older, who is at least two months from either their primary vaccine series or a prior monoplane booster dose.
That includes people who already were up to date on their boosters, including those who’ve already had more than one booster, like those 50 and older and/or who are deemed immunocompromised?
Yes, as long as you are at least two months from your most recent monovalent booster, you’re eligible for a bivalent booster.
Should we expect multiple versions of bivalent or even trivalent formulations over time as additional variations of COVID-19 take form, similar to how we handle influenza each year with multiple strains in an annual vaccine?
It’s difficult to predict what the future holds for COVID vaccines.
The virus has shown it can change so we may likely see additional variants in the future, and potentially some seasonality.
Plus, the mRNA technology can be adapted to address future variants so it’s possible that we may see further adjustments to COVID vaccines in the future.
What else should we know about this new round of boosters?
One thing to note is, the bivalent Moderna vaccine is only authorized for those over 18.
So those who are with the 12-to-18 age range can only get the Pfizer bivalent vaccine.
For ages 5 to 11, we’re still waiting for recommendations on them.
They remain eligible for boosters with the monovalent vaccine.
When making a decision about the timing of your next booster, one should take into account the timing of your most recent booster and whether or not you’ve had a recent infection, which is probably from BA.4 or BA.5 and therefore likely has provided at least short-term protection.
Factoring those together would help guide the decision on the timing of the booster, and is worth a consultation with your physician.
The bivalent booster is available at UConn Health.
Schedule via MyChart or by calling 860-679-5589.
Key Findings
With the end of the public health emergency (PHE) and the impacts that will have on the health care system, one in five adults have heard “nothing at all” about the Biden administration’s plan to end the COVID-19 PHE.
Six in ten (59%) adults think the end of the PHE will have “no impact” on them and their family and almost half (46%) say it won’t have an impact on the country overall.
The end of the PHE is a bigger concern to some groups who have been more negatively affected by the coronavirus pandemic, including people of color and those with lower household incomes.
The latest KFF COVID-19 Vaccine Monitor reports a quarter of adults (23%) saying they have received the bivalent booster, the most recent version of the COVID-19 vaccine that became available in September 2022.
As discussions surrounding the timing of boosters continue, about half of adults say they’re likely to get a COVID-19 vaccine annually if one was offered in that time frame, like a flu shot, including one in three (32%) who say they’re “very likely” to get an annual COVID-19 vaccine.
Vaccinated adults and those who already receive annual flu shots are among the largest shares to say they’re likely to get an annual COVID-19 booster.
About two-thirds of U.S. adults say they have either tested positive for COVID-19 (55%) or thought they had it even if they didn’t test positive (13%).
This leaves around one-third of adults who don’t think they have had COVID-19.
When it comes to who hasn’t had COVID yet, smaller shares of those ages 65 and older and Democrats report testing positive for or thinking they’ve had the virus at some point.
When those who say they’ve never had COVID are asked to say, in their own words, why they believe they haven’t been infected, 24% say they’ve avoided other people and crowds or stayed home.
Another 14% say they’re generally healthy or have a good immune system.
Around one in ten say they haven’t had COVID because they wore a mask (11%), they were vaccinated (10%), or they were generally careful and took hygiene precautions (10%).
Fewer than one in ten (6%) say they were lucky.
Similar shares across partisan lines cite avoiding people and staying home as their reasoning for never having COVID-19, but larger shares of Republicans than Democrats say they’re healthy with a good immune system (22% v. 5%) while larger shares of Democrats than Republicans say wearing a mask was the main reason they haven’t contracted the virus (20% v. 1%).
The Ending Of The Public Health Emergency
On May 11, 2023, the Biden administration intends to end the national emergency and public health declarations related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The emergency declarations, which were put in place by President Donald Trump in early 2020, giving the federal government flexibility to waive or modify certain requirements in a range of areas, including in the Medicare, Medicaid, and CHIP programs, and in private health insurance.
One in five adults have heard “nothing at all” when it comes to the Biden administration’s plan to end the COVID-19 public health emergency (PHE), with an additional 30% saying they’ve heard “not too much.”
That leaves around half of adults saying they have heard at least “some” about the end of the PHE, including 10% who have heard “a lot.”
Older adults have been one of the most highly impacted groups by COVID-19 – adults ages 50 and older are more likely to have heard “a lot” or “some” about the end of the public health emergency, with 57% who say so, compared to 42% of those under 50.
Another impacted group by the pandemic, the uninsured, are less likely to have heard about the end of the PHE.
Almost half (48%) of insured adults under the age of 65 have heard “a lot” or “some” about the plan to end the PHE, compared to 31% of those without insurance.
Less than half of Black adults (43%) and Hispanic adults (42%) have heard at least “some” about the end of the PHE, compared to half of White adults (51%).
Similar shares of Democrats, Republicans, and independents have heard at least “some” about the end of the PHE.
Six in ten (59%) adults think the end of the COVID PHE will have “no impact” on them and their family and almost half (46%) say it won’t have an impact on the country overall.
Similar shares say they think the end of the public health emergency will have a “positive impact” (20%) or a “negative impact” (21%) on them and their family.
About a quarter of the public (27%) say it will have a “positive impact” on the country, while another quarter (26%) think the end of the public health emergency will have a “negative impact” on the country overall.
The end of the PHE is a bigger concern to some groups who have been more negatively affected by the coronavirus pandemic, with around three in ten Black adults (29%) and one-third of Hispanic adults reporting that the end of the COVID-19 public health emergency will have a negative impact on them and their family, compared to 16% of White adults.
Three in ten adults (31%) living in households with incomes of less than $40,000 say the end of the PHE will have a negative impact on them and their family, compared to one in ten of those with incomes of $90,000 or more.
The Future Of Bivalent Boosters in the U.S.
The latest KFF COVID-19 Vaccine Monitor reports a quarter of adults (23%) saying they have received the bivalent booster, the most recent version of the COVID-19 vaccine that became available in September 2022.
Slightly more than half of the public say they have either received an older booster dose but not the most recent version (25%) or received initial full course of vaccines but no booster doses (25%).
One in four adults in the U.S. report being unvaccinated or partially vaccinated.
Adults ages 65 and older and Democrats are among the groups with the largest shares saying they have gotten the bivalent booster dose, with around four in ten who report getting their shot (42% of those ages 65 and older, and 41% of Democrats).
The Food and Drug Administration has begun discussions of what the future of the COVID-19 vaccinations will look like for Americans and how often booster doses will be available.
One possibility presented by the FDA would be for the COVID-19 vaccine to be offered annually, like the flu shot, as the impact of COVID-19 booster doses have been shown to fade after about six months.
About half of adults say they’re likely to get a COVID-19 vaccine annually if one was offered in that time frame, like a flu shot, including one in three (32%) who say they’re “very likely” to get an annual COVID-19 vaccine.
Vaccinated adults, especially those who have received a booster dose, are among the most likely to say they’d get a COVID-19 vaccine annually.
Eight in ten adults who have received a booster dose of the vaccine say they would be likely to get an annual vaccine, including more than half who say they are “very likely.”
Among the vaccinated adults who have not received the suggested boosters, willingness to get an annual vaccine lags, with less than half (42%) saying they would be likely to get an annual COVID-19 vaccine.
In addition, about one in ten of those who are only partially vaccinated or unvaccinated say they would be likely to get a COVID-19 vaccine annually.
Those who get annual flu shots are more likely than those who don’t normally get flu shots to say they would be likely to get an annual COVID-19 vaccine.
Three-fourths (76%) of those who say they normally get an annual flu vaccine (which is about 53% of all adults) say they’d be likely to get one, compared to 26% who don’t normally get their annual flu shot.
About half (51%) of those who don’t get an annual flu vaccine say they’re “not at all likely” to get an annual COVID-19 vaccine.
People Report Various Reasons For Never Having COVID-19
About two-thirds of U.S. adults say they have either tested positive for COVID-19 (55%) or thought they had it even if they didn’t test positive (13%).
This leaves around one-third of adults who don’t think they have had COVID-19.
The share of adults who don’t think they have had COVID-19 increases to nearly half of adults 65 and older, a group that had earlier access to vaccines and booster doses due to increased risks and complications from the virus.
A slightly larger share of Democrats compared to Republicans say they don’t think they have had COVID-19 (36% v. 25%), which may be related to both higher vaccination rates among Democrats as well as that group being more likely to report taking “a lot” of precautions (54% v. 24%) to not get sick.
Notably, there is no difference in the share who say they’ve had COVID between vaccinated and unvaccinated adults (68% v. 70%).
There is also no difference in the share who say they’ve had COVID between groups who report taking “a lot” or “some” precautions against COVID-19 (such as wearing a mask or avoiding large crowds) versus those who report taking “not too many” or no precautions at all (69% v. 67%).
Most people (64%) who haven’t had COVID-19 think they have avoided the virus because they have been careful and taken precautions.
This is more than twice the share who attribute their lack of illness to being lucky (29%).
Less than one in ten (6%) say COVID isn’t really present in their area.
Most Democrats (72%), adults ages 50 and older (70%), and vaccinated adults (68%) who haven’t gotten sick attribute it to being careful and taking precautions.
While half of Republicans who haven’t gotten sick also say it is because they have been careful, about four in ten (39%) cite being lucky as their reason for not getting COVID.
Larger shares of unvaccinated adults than those who are vaccinated say that COVID isn’t really present in their area (19% of unvaccinated adults v. 3% of vaccinated adults).
When those who haven’t gotten COVID were asked to provide what they think the main reason was in their own words, about a quarter (24%) offer responses related to avoiding other people and crowds or staying home.
Another 14% attribute it to the fact that they’re generally healthy or have a good immune system.
Around one in ten think they haven’t had COVID because they wore a mask (11%), they were vaccinated (10%), or they were generally careful and took hygiene precautions (10%).
Fewer than one in ten (6%) offer responses related to them being lucky.
Similar shares across partisan lines cite avoiding people and staying home as their reasoning for never having COVID-19, but larger shares of Republicans than Democrats say they’re healthy with a good immune system (22% v. 5%) while larger shares of Democrats than Republicans say wearing a mask was the main reason they haven’t contracted the virus (20% v. 1%).
CNN —
Liu, a 39-year-old tech worker in Beijing, arrived in the central city of Zhengzhou on Sunday with all the boxes ticked to travel under China’s stringent Covid restrictions.
He had tested negative for Covid-19 the day before; his hotel had confirmed he could be checked in; and the health code on his phone app was green – meaning he had not been exposed to people or places deemed risks and was therefore free to travel.
But when Liu scanned a local QR code to exit the Zhengzhou train station, his health code came back red – a nightmare for any traveler in China, where freedom of movement is strictly dictated by a color-code system imposed by the government to control the spread of the virus.
Anyone with a red code – usually assigned to people infected with Covid or deemed by authorities to be at high risk of infection – immediately becomes persona non grata.
They are banned from all public venues and transport, and are often subject to weeks of government quarantine.
That all but derailed plans for Liu, who had come to Zhengzhou, the provincial capital of Henan province, to seek redress from a bank that has frozen his deposits.
He had put his life savings – totaling about 6 million yuan ($890,000) – into a rural bank in Henan, and since April hasn’t been able to withdraw a penny.
Over the past two months, thousands of depositors like Liu have been fighting to recover their savings from at least four rural banks in Henan – in a case that involves billions of dollars.
In late May, hundreds of them traveled to Zhengzhou from across China and staged a protest outside the office of the Henan banking regulator to demand their money back – to no avail.
Another protest was planned for Monday.
But as the depositors arrived in Zhengzhou, they were stunned to find that their health codes – which were green upon departure – had turned red, according to six who spoke with CNN and social media posts.
Dozens of depositors were taken into a quarantine hotel guarded by police and local officials, before being sent away on trains bound for their hometowns the next day; others were “quarantined” at several other locations in the city, including a college campus, according to the witnesses and online posts.
Depositors accused Zhengzhou authorities of tampering with the health code system to prevent them from returning to the city – and thus thwarting their plans to fend for their rights.
“The health code should have been used to prevent the spread of the pandemic, but now it has deviated from its original role and become something like a good citizen certificate,” said Qiu, a depositor in eastern Jiangsu province.
Qiu, a teacher, had not been to Henan to protest, but his health code also turned red on Sunday evening after he scanned a QR code from Zhengzhou.
He said a fellow depositor had shared a photo of the Zhengzhou QR code on the WeChat messaging app, in an attempt to find out whether depositors outside Henan were also affected.
The red code seems to target only depositors.
Qiu used his wife’s phone to scan the QR code, and it came back green, he said.
“I called the government hotline in Zhengzhou to complain about my red code, and they told me there was some error with the Big Data information database.”
Liu and Qiu both asked to be identified only by their surnames.
CNN has reached out to the Zhengzhou government for comment.
The Henan Provincial Health Commission told state-run news website thepaper.cn it was “investigating and verifying” the complaints from depositors who received red codes.
A patient scans the QR code in a temporary hospital for people infected with Covid-19 in Shanghai on April 24.
Ray Young/FeatureChina/AP
Online backlash
The alleged abuse of power sparked an outcry on social media.
“Now (the authorities) can stop you from petitioning by directly putting digital shackles on you, aka giving you red codes,” said one comment on Weibo, China’s Twitter-like platform.
Hu Xijin, the former editor-in-chief of the Global Times, a state-run nationalist tabloid, said on Weibo that local governments should not use health codes for any purposes other than epidemic prevention.
“If any locality tries to prevent the movement of certain people by controlling their health codes for other purposes, it’s not only a clear violation of Covid prevention laws and regulations, but also will jeopardize the credibility of the health codes and the public’s support for epidemic prevention,” Hu wrote on Tuesday.
“It’ll do more harm than good to our social governance.
”
Rights groups have long warned that China’s omnipresent Covid surveillance and tracking network could be used by authorities to target individuals and groups for political reasons, such as suppressing dissent.
Last November, Xie Yang, a human rights lawyer in the southern city of Changsha, said on Twitter that his health code turned red on the morning he was about to board a flight to Shanghai to visit the mother of Zhang Zhan, a citizen journalist imprisoned for reporting on China’s initial coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan.
“The health code, like many algorithmic-based systems in China and around the world, lacks transparency.
Exactly how companies designed the app and the criteria they use to categorize people remain unclear … It is also hard to know whether the system allows local governments to tamper with it as a means to prevent protests,” said Maya Wang, a researcher at Human Rights Watch who has studied China’s digital surveillance.
“The opacity of the health code, the ability of it to arbitrarily control people’s movement while giving people few means to effectively appeal the app’s decision, makes it an especially abusive system.”
Code turns green again
From the Zhengzhou train station, Liu, the depositor from Beijing, was taken to a room where several other travelers with red health codes were present.
There, he met another depositor who had traveled from Anyang, another city in Henan, and the two of them were then escorted by police to a quarantine hotel.
By the evening, about 40 depositors – all with red health codes – had ended up at the hotel, and were told to stay the night there.
The following afternoon, he was allowed to leave the hotel and return to Beijing – escorted by police and local officials until he boarded the train.
He was exempted from scanning any QR codes on the way – because his code was still red and according to Covid rules, he would not have been allowed to enter the train station, let alone travel.
On Tuesday, as news and anger about the red health codes spread online, some depositors said their health codes had turned green again.
Liu’s code also turned green by the late afternoon, but he said he wants accountability.
“Officials who made the decision (to tamper with the health code system) and who carried out the policy should receive their punishment according to law,” he said.
“But I’m not too optimistic about that.
The government’s power is too capricious.”
CNN —
Convalescent plasma – a once-celebrated treatment for Covid-19 that has largely fallen out of favor – does work well for people who are immune-compromised, according to a study published Thursday.
The report in the journal JAMA Network Open analyzed the results of nine studies and found that immune-compromised Covid-19 patients were 37% less likely to die if they got convalescent plasma, an antibody-rich blood product from people who’d recovered from the virus.
Although it’s legal to use convalescent plasma to treat Covid patients who are immune-compromised, as inpatients or outpatients, government guidelines are neutral about whether the treatment works, so some hospitals offer it but others do not.
“Our concern is that many patients who need [convalescent plasma] are not getting it,” said Dr. Arturo Casadevall, an infectious disease expert at Johns Hopkins University and a co-author of the new study.
“This is really important because these people can be treated, and they could have better outcomes with this material if we can just get the word out.”
He said it’s to everyone’s advantage to treat immune-compromised patients quickly.
Immune-compromised people sometimes have “smoldering Covid” for months because they lack the antibodies to fight it off, which gives the virus plenty of opportunities to mutate in the person’s body.
“These immune-compromised patients are essentially variant factories,” said Dr. Michael Joyner, an anesthesiologist at the Mayo Clinic and another study co-author.
“And you do not want a bunch of people running around out there making weird variants.”
There are about 7 million immune-compromised people in the US, and treating them if they contract Covid-19 has proved challenging.
Many of them can’t take the antiviral drug Paxlovid because it interferes with other medicines they take.
Monoclonal antibodies, once popular for prevention and treatment for this group, aren’t used anymore because coronavirus variants have changed over time.
One of the advantages of convalescent plasma is that as long as it’s been donated recently, there’s a high likelihood it will have antibodies to currently circulating variants, according to advocates for the treatment.
But the National Institutes of Health’s Covid-19 treatment guidelines say there’s not enough evidence to recommend either for or against the use of convalescent plasma in people with compromised immune systems.
Three times last year – in May, August and December – Casadevall, Joyner and dozens of other doctors from Harvard, Stanford, Mayo, Columbia and other academic medical centers wrote emails to scientists at the National Institutes of Health, sending them research materials and urging them to revise the guidelines.
They say they have not received a response.
Joyner said he’s “frustrated” with the NIH’s “bureaucratic rope-a-dope,” calling the agency’s guidelines a “wet blanket” that discourages doctors from trying convalescent plasma on these people.
Some patient advocates say they’re angry.
“This lack of response to the researchers is infuriating,” said Janet Handal, co-founder of the Transplant Recipient and Immunocompromised Patient Advocacy Group.
Several large randomized clinical trials on the general population, including one in India and one in the UK, have found that convalescent plasma did not reduce Covid-19 deaths or prevent severe illness, and the treatment is no longer authorized in the US for people who have healthy immune systems.
The nine studies analyzed in the new report are much smaller and looked only at immune-compromised patients.
Dr. Peter Horby, a professor at the University of Oxford and the co-principal investigator of the large UK study, said that a large randomized clinical trial should be done on immune-compromised patients before clinical practice guidelines for this group are changed.
He said that support for convalescent plasma to treat Covid-19 has been based on “an emotional feeling that something had to be done.”
“We’ve seen time and again that people’s beliefs and emotions about what works can be wildly wrong, and so the best thing to do is to evaluate these things properly in trials,” he said.
Winding history of convalescent plasma for Covid-19
At the beginning of the pandemic, there was great enthusiasm for convalescent plasma as Covid-19 survivors sought to save lives, donating antibodies against the virus to people who were sometimes at death’s door.
In August 2020, the US Food and Drug Administration granted emergency use authorization for the treatment, but some questioned whether it was politically motivated and whether the data really showed that it worked.
Then, the large clinical trials suggested convalescent plasma didn’t work.
“We didn’t see a benefit,” said Horby, director of Oxford’s Pandemic Sciences Institute.
But there was one exception.
Horby said his study did find “some evidence of some benefit” in Covid-19 patients who had not developed antibodies against the virus.
This would most likely include immune-compromised patients because their faulty immune systems don’t always generate antibodies the way they should, even after infection.
When this group of patients received convalescent plasma, Horby said, they had a slightly shortened hospital stay and a slightly lower risk of ending up on a ventilator compared with similar patients who did not receive convalescent plasma.
Joyner and Casadevall, the Mayo and Hopkins doctors, point to that finding – and a similar one in a large trial in Australia, Canada, the UK and the US, as well as results of smaller studies – as an indication that convalescent plasma is worth trying in immune-compromised patients.
‘I felt like half a person’
Immune-compromised patients who catch Covid-19 can get convalescent plasma relatively easily if they’re patients at Hopkins, Mayo or several other medical centers.
But many other people might have a difficult time accessing it.
It took Bernadette Kay of Manhattan Beach, California, months to get it, and she had to be “relentless” and call in the help of several “angels” in New York, Maryland, Minnesota and California to finally make it work.
Kay, 64, who has a compromised immune system because of a drug she takes for rheumatoid arthritis, got Covid-19 in July.
She took two monoclonal antibodies, as well as remdesivir and Paxlovid – twice.
But she still tested positive on and off for months and had fatigue, congestion and headaches.
“I felt like half a person,” she said.
“I was not an able-bodied person.
I was disabled because of lack of energy.
It feels dark – a heavy feeling in your forehead and your face.”
Kay said she saw several doctors and none of them suggested convalescent plasma.
That’s where her first angel came in: her daughter, who had signed her up for the Transplant Recipient and Immunocompromised Patient Advocacy Group.
That group, as well as the CLL Society, an advocacy organization for cancer patients, have been helping immune-compromised people when they get infected with Covid-19, connecting them with experts and offering guidance on how to arrange to have the plasma ordered.
Kay says Handal, the co-founder of the immune-compromised patients’ group, was her second angel, because she pointed her to angels No. 3 and 4: Joyner, the Mayo doctor, and Dr. Shmuel Shoham, an infectious disease expert at Hopkins.
Joyner and Shoham pointed Kay to her fifth angel: Chaim Lebovits, a businessman, leader in the New York’s Hasidic Jewish community and co-founder of the Covid Plasma Initiative.
Lebovits reached out to a hospital and blood bank near Kay that could procure the plasma once a doctor ordered it.
Kay then reached out to six local doctors, most of them infectious disease experts, inquiring about convalescent plasma, but she didn’t make any progress.
“I think they thought it was quack medicine,” she said.
By this time, it was November, four months after she initially tested positive for Covid.
She sought out a seventh doctor, sending him information from plasma experts, including a slide presentation by Joyner and Casdevall.
She said that doctor, after conferring with someone at the blood bank that Libovits had suggested, agreed to order the plasma.
That’s where her sixth angel came in: Robert Simpson, vice president for hospital services at the San Diego Blood Bank, who arranged to have the blood flown in from Stanford University Medical Center.
“Robert watched the flight on Flight Tracker and had a courier waiting to bring it to the hospital,” Kay said, adding that she calls her angels collectively her “circle of love.”
Two to three weeks after her infusion, she began to feel better.
She tested negative on January 4 and has continued to feel well and test negative since then.
“My energy level is back to normal.
I don’t feel like half a person,” she said.
She said she’ll never know for sure exactly what spurred her recovery, but “I think it was plasma that made the difference, because in six months, nothing else made a difference.”
Kay, who works in health care, said most other people wouldn’t have known how to navigate the system like she did or might have given up in frustration.
“With the help of Janet [Handal] and her team of scientists, I’ve been able to get where I am today,” she said.
“But it was not easy.
This was driven by my bullheaded advocacy, because that’s who I am.
I think I’m a total anomaly.
No one has the persistence that I have.”
‘We’ve encountered many roadblocks’
Joyner said that while he and his colleagues wait for a response from their emails to the NIH, they’ve formed the National Covid-19 Convalescent Plasma Project, and they have a phone meeting every Thursday night to discuss their progress.
“We’ve encountered many roadblocks,” said Dr. Liise-anne Pirofski, chief of the Division of Infectious Diseases at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
“It’s just not viewed as part of the Covid-19 treatment armamentarium, and it should be.”
Pirofski, Joyner and Casadevall say they receive no financial benefit from convalescent plasma.
They think one reason convalescent plasma isn’t more widely used is that there isn’t a pharmaceutical company spending money to advocate for it.
Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.
Handal, who runs the Facebook group for people who are immune-compromised, said that after she sent several emails to the NIH, agency scientists wrote back, inviting her and other leaders of her group to a meeting next week.
She plans to tell them that they need to review their Covid-19 plasma guidelines and fund more research on the coronavirus and the immune-compromised, as they have few treatment options and so often isolate at home with their families to avoid the virus.
“It is unconscionable that the NIH has let stand for months its guideline on Covid convalescent plasma, which says there is not enough information to make a recommendation, while we who are immune-compromised see our treatments dwindle,” she said.
“The NIH needs to speak to the clinician researchers who are experts, prioritize the immune-compromised and fund the research needed to keep us safe.”
A higher viral load of SARS-CoV-2 in plasma is associated with increased COVID-19 disease severity.
How viral load affects the expression of host (immune response) genes in the upper airway, however, has not been probed in the context of early symptomatic disease.
Suman Das, PhD, and colleagues conducted metatranscriptomic (gene expression) analysis of nasopharyngeal swab samples collected from an overall young population diagnosed with COVID-19 within 24 hours of sample collection, allowing for early timepoint assessment.
The researchers found that high viral load was associated with the upregulation of adaptive immune system, interferon signaling and chemokine signaling genes.
Their method detected SARS-CoV-2 in almost all samples with high genome coverage, with few individuals having any other common respiratory viruses, highlighting the effectiveness of public health measures like masking.
This study, published in the Journal of Virology, provides important insights into how SARS-CoV-2 viral load can affect upper airway mucosal gene expression at an early timepoint, which could impact disease progression.
Co-authors of the paper were Seesandra Rajagopala, PhD, Britton Strickland, Suman Pakala, Kyle Kimura, MD, Meghan Shilts, Christian Rosas-Salazar, MD, MPH, Hunter Brown, Michael Freeman, PhD, Bronson Wessinger, MD, Veerain Gupta, MD, Elizabeth Phillips, MD, Simon Mallal, MBBS, and Justin Turner, MD, PhD.
This work was supported in part by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institutes of Health grants AI142321, AI142321, AI154016, AI149262, HL148638, and HL146401, and the Vanderbilt Technologies for Advanced Genomics Core.
On Jan. 12, 2020, Chinese investigators combing a market for clues about the outbreak of a mysterious new illness in the city of Wuhan swabbed a cart.
It was the kind typically used for transporting animal cages, and it came back positive for the coronavirus.
Three years later, a team of international experts has sifted through the genetic contents of that swab, which were quietly uploaded to an international database and made public only this year.
In a report released on Monday night, the scientists described in detail for the first time evidence from the swab that they say strengthens the case that illegally traded wild animals ignited the coronavirus pandemic.
Chinese researchers who had originally uploaded the raw data had it removed from the database after they were contacted by the international team.
Now administrators of the database itself have cut off access to the international scientists for what they said were rules violations, raising questions about the database’s own role in the tug of war over access to data that could shed light on the origins of a virus that has killed seven million people.
Along with genetic signatures of the coronavirus, the swab from the cart contained more than 4,500 lengthy fragments of genetic material from raccoon dogs, the report said.
It had none from humans.
Some Covid-positive swabs taken from other objects and surfaces at the market, the report said, also had more genetic material from animals than from humans.
If you go into your Chahta Achvffa and log in, there should be a scrollable window near the top of your page labeled Application Status.
This should log the various things you have applied for and the dates you applied.
If you have applied for other services, you may need to go to former pages, but it will have the date you applied for a kit and the type of kit you applied for.
Researchers are still trying to discern whether a COVID-19 infection during pregnancy can lead to long-term problems for the child.
Some studies find no difference between babies born to mothers infected during pregnancy, while one recent study found an increased risk for neurodevelopmental delays in boys exposed to the virus while in utero.
That study found that boys, but not girls, born to mothers who had a positive PCR test during pregnancy were more likely to receive a neurodevelopmental-related diagnosis within their first year of life.
It was published last month in the Journal of the American Medical Association Network Open.
Meanwhile, another recent study also published in JAMA found no relationship between in-utero COVID-19 exposure and brain development in children.
Authors of both studies and outside experts say the conflicting data shows longer-term studies are needed to fully understand if and how COVID-19 in pregnant people affects infant neurodevelopment.
Research that measures milestones across early childhood and beyond is needed to fully assess whether or not there is a risk.
While right now it’s not fully known whether COVID-19 causes neurodevelopmental problems, it has long been known that an infection during pregnancy puts children at higher risk for conditions like autism, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and schizophrenia years later, with some research showing boys, in particular, are more vulnerable.
"There is growing evidence linking prenatal maternal infection and inflammation and risk for later neurodevelopmental disorders like ADHD, schizophrenia," said maternal-infant health expert Catherine Limperopoulos, who wasn't involved in either study.
Limperopoulos, who directs the Developing Brain Institute at Children's National Hospital, noted that both analyses only studied babies prior to when many milestones in expression, cognitive function and others typically emerge.
The fetal brain is particularly vulnerable to prenatal exposures, she said, including any infection during pregnancy, which may predispose children to neuropsychiatric diseases.
Still, "the data is still conflicting, and long-term studies are needed," she said.
"The good news is that to date, it appears that developmental concerns – if present – are mild.
"
LATEST: COVID led to the biggest drop in births in 50 years.
But not in every state.
Study finds neurodevelopmental risk in baby boys: What to know
In last month's analysis, researchers studied electronic health records of more than 18,000 births in Massachusetts.
These babies were born between March 2020 and May 2021 and a couple of years before the pandemic, for comparison.
Male infants were 90% more likely to have a neurodevelopmental diagnosis, such as motor function or psychological development, at 12 months of age compared to infants who were born to moms without a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Female babies didn't have the same risk.
“The results really resonated with what is biologically plausible because we know that male children have an increased risk for neurodevelopmental diagnoses like autism, or ADHD, or cognitive dysfunction compared to female children,” said lead author Dr. Andrea Edlow, a maternal-fetal medicine specialist at Massachusetts General Hospital.
“We also know that male fetuses are more vulnerable to injury from intrauterine exposures that can cause a variety of outcomes.”
The diagnoses could be due to “downstream effects” from the mother’s immune system fighting the virus, such as inflammation.
It's important to note that any potential effects from in-utero exposure to COVID-19 "may take years to manifest," said Limperopoulos.
"As such, long-term studies are critical to track the developmental progress of these infants to better understand their developmental trajectories over time.
"
RESEARCH:
Long COVID has some weird symptoms.
Face blindness may be one them.
Other study finds no effect on babies
Researchers in last week's analysis studied around 400 babies born in three hospital systems in New York, Utah and Arkansas between March 2021 and June 2022.
They found no difference between babies born to mothers infected who had the virus and those who didn’t.
While smaller, the study included babies from more than one state, and the research group used the Developmental Assessment of Young Children to assess the babies' neurodevelopmental progress, while the previous study collected that data through diagnoses marked in health records.
“Our evidence of a negative result is really reassuring,” said lead author Dr. Dani Dumitriu, a newborn hospitalist and neuroscientist at Columbia University.
The babies were enrolled in two ongoing studies tracking COVID-19 and mother-and-baby outcomes led by Dumitriu.
Last year, a meta-analysis of eight studies and more than 21,000 infants also found that overall neurodevelopment wasn’t changed by birth during the pandemic or gestational exposure, except for communication delay.
The bottom line: What parents should know
If a parent is concerned after contracting COVID-19 infection during pregnancy, experts say they should talk with their pediatrician about developmental evaluations.
"Pregnant people can protect their babies by ensuring that they attend their well-baby visits with their pediatricians so that their development milestones are monitored over time," Limperopoulos said.
Mothers, those expecting, breastfeeding and trying to get pregnant should protect themselves against COVID-19 by getting vaccinated, and experts say the shot is safe for pregnant people.
Pregnant people are more vulnerable to adverse health outcomes if they contract COVID-19, according to the CDC.
Data from the agency shows an upward trend among pregnant patients receiving the vaccine.
FACT CHECK:COVID vaccines are safe during pregnancy, contrary to viral claim
MORE: White House to invest $5 billion in next-generation COVID vaccines
Reach Nada Hassanein at nhassanein@usatoday.com or on Twitter @nhassanein_.
In spring 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic forced California’s community colleges to switch to fully online instruction to serve the system’s 2.1 million students in a time of crisis.
Today, not all students are eager to go back to traditional face-to-face instruction, and prospective students have cited access to online courses as the most important factor motivating enrollment.
Ensuring that colleges, faculty, and students have the resources they need to be successful in online courses—including access to technology—will be vital to help meet growing student demand for more flexibility and to improve access, completion, and equity in our higher education systems.
The demand for online courses is not entirely new.
Pre-pandemic, community college enrollment in online courses was already on the rise.
Between 2001, when internet-based courses were first offered, and 2019, enrollment grew substantially.
In fall 2019, the share of enrollment in online courses reached almost 20% of total course enrollments.
And to meet student demand, community colleges were increasing the number of online programs.
In the second year of the pandemic, community colleges started to encourage students and faculty to go back to in-person courses, but online enrollments remained high, with over three times more enrollments in online courses than face-to-face courses in spring 2021.
In spring 2022, there were still about 50% more enrollments in online instruction than in face-to-face instruction.
In contrast, prior to the pandemic, there were only about a fifth as many online enrollments as face-to-face enrollments.
With online learning and hybrid formats quickly becoming part of the new normal, it is critical that these forms of instruction be as effective as in-person learning.
High-quality online courses tend to follow standards related to course design, student interaction and collaboration, assessment, learner support, and accessibility.
However, creating high-quality online courses is not necessarily cheap or easy, and the current evidence on academic outcomes in online college courses is mixed.
Given the high volume of community college courses—over 118,000 credit courses in spring 2022 alone—even if a small fraction were to remain online or hybrid, investing in quality online instruction that produces similar outcomes to face-to-face courses would require enormous effort and resources.
The California Community College Chancellor’s Office (CCCCO) has provided funding to help colleges implement high-quality online teaching and learning through several initiatives.
The Online Education Initiative supports faculty in using rigorous standards and rubrics for online courses.
The CCCCO also supports the Online Network of Educators, which provides training on digital tools and platforms.
Other initiatives provide colleges with high-speed internet and technology.
In addition, individual colleges sometimes provide training.
For example, Skyline College offers faculty support in using online learning management systems and improving online pedagogy.
However, these initiatives frequently rely on the motivation and interest of individual faculty and departments, and faculty are not always compensated for engaging in these activities.
A sustained, systematic approach that supports online course development and delivery—and that promotes best practices in online education—is necessary to speed up the adoption of high-quality standards for online courses.
Similarly, ensuring that all faculty and students have access to resources like broadband internet and computing devices, and that students have access to counseling and tutoring services, will be vital.
Since student demand for online education is likely to remain high in the coming years, providing appropriate incentives for faculty and colleges to improve online instruction—and broadening student access to online services and resources—will help ensure that online courses are delivered effectively and equitably.
The proposed methods are applied to the three publicly available datasets that are dedicatedly focused on the collections of CT scan images of COVID and non-COVID patients.
Informed consent was received from each patient during the development of those datasets by the respective authors of each dataset.
This study only utilized those accessible datasets and proposed a novel method to detect COVID-19 from CT scan images.
The literature27,28,29 states that all techniques utilized to gather data and create a dataset centered on CT scan images were carried out in conformity with pertinent rules and regulations.
In addition, the proposed methodology (VGGFusionNet) was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
This section shows the Computer Vision (CV) approach to detect COVID-19 positive and negative people from CT images.
Several CT images, including COVID-19 positive and negative, were utilized to train the VGGFusionNet proposed model.
The sample data for the training phase contains a high level of quality and contrast.
For detecting Region of Interest (ROI), unwanted regions are removed, and before doing this, the grayscale conversion has been processed for all the input datasets.
The patches are then accumulated from the ROI images, and then filtering and segmentation methods are performed.
For feature extraction, CNN and HOG are combined to create feature vectors.
Finally, the classification is performed using these feature vectors.
The test image is then categorized according to whether or not it is influenced by COVID-19.
Figure 1 depicts the proposed system's functioning method and is also represented by Algorithm 1.
This model has been used for each training image to apply preprocessing techniques and feature extraction using CNN with O(n) complexity.
HOG feature extraction technique has been performed for each image with O(n) complexity.
This model produces the complexity
[O(n) + O(n)] for the n number of an input image.
Figure 1 Workflow diagram of proposed VGGFusionNet model.
Full size image
Dataset
The patients' CT scan images have been collected and stored in a data repository.
To evaluate the proposed intelligent system's performance, the images were divided into two categories: normal and COVID-19.
The performance of the system was validated using three standard datasets in this study.
(A)
The data set27 utilized in this experimental assessment comprised of 1600 COVID-19 and 100 normal CT scan images in two primary categories.
(B)
The COVID-CT-Dataset proposed by Yang et al.28 from the Cornel University have used CT images from 216 patients, with 349 COVID-19 CT images and 463 non-COVID-19 CT images, respectively.
(C)
In this article29, a publicly accessible CT scan dataset of 2482 CT scans, containing 1252 CT COVID-19 positive and 1230 COVID-19 negative.
The images from all three data sets were merged to generate a dataset for this work because the number of images accessible in the public repository was limited.
Both COVID-19 and normal classes were used in the training and testing stages.
The COVID-19 class contained 3068 images, and the class of the normal image included 1793 images.
The entire dataset was divided into 0.8 portions for training and the remaining 0.2 portions for testing based on the patients’ distribution.
This experiment considered individual patients as distinct train data rather than using random CT images.
This will ensure unbiased results as two very similar samples will not be present in the training phase along with the testing phase also.
Figure 2 shows a comparison between COVID-19 and normal CT scan images.
In the case of COVID-19, the lung density is increased, which causes whiteness in the lungs on radiography, similar to cases of Pneumonia.
Figure 2 CT scan images of COVID-19 positive and negative.
Full size image
Data pre-processing
Image processing is a crucial step in obtaining meaningful information and correct classification.
The images were converted from RGB to grayscale utilizing a MATLAB tool and resized to 224 × 224 pixels before being fed into the algorithm.
Figure 3 shows examples of images at various stages of data preprocessing.
Figure 3 Image preprocessing stages.
Full size image
Modified anisotropic diffusion filtering (MADF)
Filtering techniques keep the relevant information in an image while removing any noise.
Information-preserving filtering algorithms are the most effective at extracting significant features from any noisy image.
Filtering performance has been evaluated using speckle-affected test images during the testing phase.
Edge information can be preserved and enhanced while noise is suppressed using anisotropic diffusion filtering.
The edge information, as well as noise, is detected by the gradient operator.
For severe speckle and low contrast images, this method detects noise gradient changes beyond the edge gradient.
These alterations remove edge information more than noise, resulting in worse filtering accuracy.
Similarly, owing to image smoothing, speckle reducing anisotropic diffusion cannot retain all of the edge information.
Oriented-based non-local methods (OBNLM) are affected by moving noise and are unable to store precise information.
Anisotropic diffusion with memory-based speckle statistic (ADMSS) is crisper30.
For this study, MADF has been recommended as a way to maintain precise information while reducing image noise and distortion.
This filtering technique outperforms the others because of its capacity to eliminate multiplicative speckle noise in-plane regions.
To store important edge information, the proposed method employs correlation and noise kurtosis values.
This speckle suppression procedure is repeated until the image's noise component approaches Gaussian values.
The kurtosis should be zero in this circumstance.
Equation (1) represents the noise part, and iteration continues until the noise part's kurtosis falls below the values computed using Eq.
(3).
Equation (2) can be used to define this measurement.
The loop ends when the slightest correlation between image class and noise class.
From Eqs.
(1) to (7)31, I and I 0 denote the actual and noisy image, respectively, and G indicates the noise intensity means.
The kurtosis value k is found using Eq.
(5).
Equation (6) calculates the image intensity correlation, while Eq.
(7) calculates the noise intensity correlation.
When ρI and ρG have the lowest deviation, the proposed filtering produces the best results.
$${I}_{0}={I}_{n}$$ (1)
$$\mathrm{n}= \frac{\mathrm{I}-\mathrm{G}}{\surd \mathrm{G}}$$ (2)
$$\upmu =\frac{{\sum }_{i=1}^{N}{G}_{i}}{N}$$ (3)
$$k=\frac{\frac{1}{N} {\sum }_{i=0}^{N}{\left(G-\upmu \right)}^{4}}{{[\frac{1}{N} {\sum }_{i=0}^{N}{\left(G-\upmu \right)}^{2}]}^{2}}-3$$ (4)
$$\mathrm{abs}(\mathrm{n}-\mathrm{k})\le 0.001$$ (5)
$${\uprho }_{\mathrm{I }}=\frac{{\sum }_{\mathrm{i}=0}^{\mathrm{M}-1}{\sum }_{\mathrm{j}=0}^{\mathrm{N}-1}\mathrm{i}.\mathrm{j}.{\mathrm{p}}_{\mathrm{I }}\left(\mathrm{i},\mathrm{j}\right)-\upmu {\mathrm{I}}_{\mathrm{x}}\upmu {\mathrm{I}}_{\mathrm{y}}}{\frac{\sum_{\mathrm{i}=1}^{\mathrm{N}}({\mathrm{I}}_{\mathrm{ix}}-{\upmu }_{\mathrm{Ix}}){(\mathrm{I}}_{\mathrm{iy}}-{\upmu }_{\mathrm{Iy}})}{\mathrm{N}}}$$ (6)
$${\uprho }_{\mathrm{G }}=\frac{{\sum }_{\mathrm{i}=0}^{\mathrm{M}-1}{\sum }_{\mathrm{j}=0}^{\mathrm{N}-1}\mathrm{i}.\mathrm{j}.{\mathrm{p}}_{\mathrm{G }}\left(\mathrm{i},\mathrm{j}\right)-\upmu {\mathrm{G}}_{\mathrm{x}}\upmu {\mathrm{G}}_{\mathrm{y}}}{\frac{\sum_{\mathrm{i}=1}^{\mathrm{N}}({\mathrm{G}}_{\mathrm{ix}}-{\upmu }_{\mathrm{Ix}}){(\mathrm{G}}_{\mathrm{iy}}-{\upmu }_{\mathrm{Iy}})}{\mathrm{N}}}$$ (7)
A comparison of several Anisotropic Diffusion methods is shown in Fig. 4 and an example of original images.
The proposed MADF technique's edge preservation capability was superior to the other techniques.
Figure 4 Category wise (COVID-19 and normal) images after different diffusion techniques.
Full size image
Image segmentation
Segmentation is the non-trivial task for differentiating the individual pixels of computed tomography (CT) images.
The segmented images would only be considered for the following processes.
A designed segmentation technique simplifies the chest CT data for its less relative computational complexity.
The applied segmentation method provides an improved detection accuracy for the infected image.
After investigating preprocessed data, the experiment found that the desired result was obtained for two groups of clusters.
The fracture regions from the COVID-19 CT scan images.
Each iteration updates the cluster's centroid to reduce the distance between each intensity and the centroid32.
The centroid is calculated by the mean intensities of all pixels within a group of clusters using Eq.
(8).
The distance is calculated using Eq.
(9).
$${C}_{k}=\sum {z}_{i}/ N $$ (8)
$$r=|{C}_{k}-{x}_{i}|$$ (9)
Here the centroid of \(k\)th cluster is defined as \({C}_{k}\) and the within-cluster intensity is \({z}_{i}\).
\({x}_{i}\) is denoted for each pixel intensity for the grey level of \(N\).
This experiment has used the clustering technique for region segmentation.
Figure 5 shows the results of segmenting a sample image using Algorithm 233.
Figure 5 Image segmentation stages using region segmentation algorithm.
Full size image
Feature extractor
Two feature extraction approaches, Histogram Oriented Gradient (HOG) and VGG-19 are used individually in this study.
These features are incorporated into a feature vector when obtained using HOG and VGG-19.
This fused vector aids in detecting COVID-19 positivity or negativity from a CT scan with the most remarkable accuracy.
Histogram oriented gradient (HOG)
The exploratory analysis found that our experiment's HOG34 feature descriptor is more robust for chest CT data.
With the use of local intensity gradients, the HOG feature extractor can characterize object information34.
The image is decomposed into smaller gradients, and these parts are combined.
A Sobel kernel is used to filter the segmented image to obtain the gradient direction of \({G}_{x}\) and \({G}_{y}\).
Equations (10) and (11) calculate the magnitude of angle and gradient at each pixel.
$${f}_{|G\left(i,j\right)|}=\sqrt{{G}_{x}{(i,j)}^{2}+{G}_{y}{(i,j)}^{2}}$$ (10)
$${\theta }_{|G\left(i,j\right)|}={\mathrm{tan}}^{-1}(\frac{{G}_{y}(i,j)}{{G}_{x}(i,j)})$$ (11)
Here the \(f\) is the gradient magnitude at direction \(\theta \) for the pixel denoted by row \(i\) and column \(j\).
Then, a histogram is found using the angle and gradient.
The normalization vector is formed using each block of the histogram.
Finally, Eq. (12) represents the HOG feature descriptor with eight block sizes,
$$V=\sum_{i}^{N}\frac{{V}_{i}}{\sqrt{{V}_{i}^{2}+k}}$$ (12)
The normalized vector is combined in each block, and the HOG feature vector is obtained using Eq.
(12).
It differentiates the significant region of an image patch containing useful information by forming a histogram and skipping the extraneous values.
HOG is a robust feature generator for object recognition in the image.
It is much easier and quicker to compute.
Furthermore, HOG describes a whole image or patch, whereas SIFT35 or other features extraction techniques describe a specific point in the image.
It also provides more reliable features than other feature extraction techniques.
For HOG feature extraction, the images are preprocessed into size 64 × 128.
This can be achieved by the image patches of 8 × 8 and 16 × 16, respectively.
Then, the gradient is calculated for each image pixel in \(x\) and \(y\)-direction.
A calculated gradient helps to obtain the pixel values for each patch.
The exact process is repeated for all the pixels in the image.
By doing so, continue to the whole image; the features are recorded for each smaller patch of the image.
While dividing the image into 88% cells, this experiment generates a 9 × 1 matrix for each cell.
Finally, a 16 × 16 block forms by combining four 8 × 8 cells.
As the histogram of each 8 × 8 cell performs one 9 × 1 matrix, the total 16 × 16 block has one single 36 × 1 vector.
In Eq.
(5), the normalized vector size would be 36 × 1.
The gradient of this normalized vector in the horizontal position is 7 and in the vertical position is 15 forming a total of 7 × 15 = 105.
Thus, this experiment has found total features for each image would be 105 × 36 × 1 = 3780 using the HOG technique.
The overall HOG features extraction approach is depicted in Fig.
6.
Figure 6 Architectural representation of histogram oriented gradient features extraction approach.
Full size image
CNN based feature extractor and classification
One of the most prominent advancements in computer vision is image feature extraction utilizing CNN.
Several CNN models, both from scratch and pre-trained, were used for the test in this experiment.
While the scratch model performs badly with a little datasets, the pre-trained model assists in reducing the quantity of data needed.
As a feature extractor, we fine-tune a pre-trained VGG19 model using our experiment dataset.
The 19-layer version of VGGNet was used to create this network model.
In this experiment, VGG19 outperformed VGG16, as well as other deep learning models including Alexnet, ResNet50, and scratch models.
The VGG19 model has sixteen convolution layers followed by three fully connected layers, shown in Fig. 7.
For each convolution layer's output, a non-linear ReLU is employed as an activation function.
The whole convolution parts are divided into five sub-regions by five successive max-pooling layers.
Two convolution layers, 64 and 128 respectively, make up the first and second sub-regions.
Figure 7 Architecture of the VGG19 model.
Full size image
The remaining three sub-regions are made up of four convolution layers with values of 256, 512, and 512.
After the convolutional layers' sub-regions, pooling layers are used to minimize the learnable parameter.
Our VGG19 model's final layer is replaced with a softmax classification layer.
Before the sigmoid output function, two hidden layers with 512 and 4096 neurons are included.
To avoid overfitting in the execution of this fine-tuned model, L2 regularization was used after each fully connected layer except the dropout layer.
In the literature, data fusion has been employed in a number of computer vision and machine learning applications.
14,096 and 13,780 feature vectors are provided by two feature extractors.
HOG and CNN features are retrieved from Eqs.
(13) and (14), respectively.
Equation (15) represents the fusion of the extracted features into a single vector.
$${f}_{HOG 1xn}=\{ {HOG}_{1x1}, {HOG}_{1x2}, {HOG}_{1x3}\dots \dots \dots \dots \dots \dots {HOG}_{1xn}\}$$ (13)
$${f}_{VGG-19 1xm}=\{ {VGG19}_{1x1}, {VGG19}_{1x2}, {VGG19}_{1x3}\dots \dots \dots \dots \dots \dots {VGG19}_{1xm}\}$$ (14)
$${Fused(features vector)}_{1xq} = \sum_{i=1}^{3}\{{f}_{HOG 1xn}, {f}_{VGG-19 1xm}\}$$ (15)
The presented method uses entropy-based feature fusion with a fused vector of 1 × 1186.
Entropy has been applied to the feature vector to choose optimal features based on score values.
Equations (16) and (17) reflect probability features and entropy, respectively.
Equation (17) has been used to illustrate the feature selection process37 mathematically.
From 7876 features, 1186 score-based features have been chosen using entropy.
The classifiers were fed the last selected features to recognize COVID-19 images,
$${B}_{He}= -N{He}_{b}{\sum }_{i=1}^{n}p(f)$$ (16)
$${F}_{select}= {B}_{He}(\mathrm{max}({f}_{i, }1186))$$ (17)
In Eqs.
(16) and (17), p stands for probability of features, and He stands for entropy.
The classifiers are provided with the features that have been chosen at the end.
The proposed method has been tested on a fused features vector, including HOG and deep learning features.
The VGG-19 architecture consists of 16 CNN layers, three fully linked layers, and a softmax function layer.
The fully connected and last layers remain the same for all network architectures.
Max pooling was performed over 2 × 2-pixel windows with stride 2.
The first two layers yield 4096 features out of the three completely linked layers, and the third layer offers 1000 channels.
With two neurons, the last layer represents the result (COVID-19 and Normal).
We have published redesigned tracking pages to better reflect the current state of the pandemic.
See the new pages here , and read this story to learn more about this change.
Sources: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, state governments, U.S. Census Bureau.
The C.D.C. reported on Nov. 30 that booster doses are sometimes misclassified as first doses, which may overestimate first dose coverage among adults.
About this data Sources: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, state governments, U.S. Census Bureau.
The C.D.C. reported on Nov. 30 that booster doses are sometimes misclassified as first doses, which may overestimate first dose coverage among adults.
The hot spots map shows the share of population with a new reported case over the last week.
Sources: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (daily confirmed and suspected Covid-19 hospital admissions); Census Bureau (population data).
Data prior to October 2020 was unreliable.
Data reported in the most recent seven days may be incomplete.
This chart shows for each age group the number of people per 100,000 that were newly admitted to a hospital with Covid-19 each day, according to data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Dips and spikes could be due to inconsistent reporting by hospitals.
Higher test positivity rates are a sign that many infections are not reported — even if they are tested for at home.
This results in a more severe undercount of cases.
The number of hospitalized patients with Covid is a more reliable measure because testing is more consistent in hospitals.
Read more about the data .
Sources: State and local health agencies (cases, deaths); U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (test positivity, hospitalizations, I.C.U. patients).
Test positivity, hospitalizations, I.C.U.s and deaths show seven-day averages.
Test positivity is based only on P.C.R. test results reported to the federal government.
Test positivity, hospitalization and I.C.U. data may not yet be available for yesterday.
Figures shown are the most recent data available.
Higher test positivity rates are a sign that many infections are not reported — even if they are tested for at home.
This results in a more severe undercount of cases.
The number of hospitalized patients with Covid is a more reliable measure because testing is more consistent in hospitals.
Read more about the data .
Sources: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, state governments, U.S. Census Bureau.
The C.D.C. reported on Nov. 30 that booster doses are sometimes misclassified as first doses, which may overestimate first dose coverage among adults.
About this data Sources: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, state governments, U.S. Census Bureau.
The C.D.C. reported on Nov. 30 that booster doses are sometimes misclassified as first doses, which may overestimate first dose coverage among adults.
Sources: State and local health agencies (cases, deaths); U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (test positivty, hospitalizations, I.C.U. patients).
The seven-day average is the average of the most recent seven days of data.
Cases and deaths data are assigned to dates based on when figures are publicly reported.
Figures for Covid patients in hospitals and I.C.U.s are the most recent number of patients with Covid-19 who are hospitalized or in an intensive care unit on that day.
Dips and spikes could be due to inconsistent reporting by hospitals.
Hospitalization numbers early in the pandemic are undercounts due to incomplete reporting by hospitals to the federal government.
Test positivity is based on P.C.R. viral test specimens tested by laboratories and state health departments and reported to the federal government.
Hospitalizations and test positivity are reported based on dates assigned by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and are subject to historical revisions.
Sources: State and local health agencies (cases, deaths); U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (hospitalizations); Centers for Disease Control and state governments (vaccinations); Census Bureau (population and demographic data).
The daily average for cases, test positivity and hospitalizations is calculated with data that was reported in the last seven days.
The daily average for deaths at the county-level is calculated over 30 days.
Hospitalized for each county shows the average number of Covid-19 patients hospitalized per 100,000 residents within any hospital service areas that intersect with the county and is updated once a week.
Vaccination data is not available for some counties.
All-time charts show data from Jan. 21, 2020 to present.
This table is sorted by places with the most cases per 100,000 residents in the last seven days.
Statewide data often updates more frequently than county-level data, and may not equal the sum of county-level figures.
Charts show change in daily averages and are each on their own scale.
New York typically releases new data each day.
Weekend counts may be lower because fewer sources report to the state.
This calendar shows data through 2022 and will no longer be updated in 2023.
The Times will continue to report the data for other displays on this page.
About the data
In data for New York, The Times primarily relies on reports from the state, as well as health districts or county governments that often report ahead of the state.
New York typically releases new data each day.
Weekend counts may be lower because fewer sources report to the state.
The state reports cases and deaths based on a person’s permanent or usual residence.
The Times has identified reporting anomalies or methodology changes in the data.
More about reporting anomalies or changes Feb. 28, 2023:
The Times is using C.D.C. data based on death certificates for locations that do not report deaths regularly or comprehensively.
The federal data updates approximately once a month and appears as a spike in deaths on the day it updates.
The Times is using C.D.C. data based on death certificates for locations that do not report deaths regularly or comprehensively.
The federal data updates approximately once a month and appears as a spike in deaths on the day it updates.
Feb. 27, 2023: New York City removed many deaths.
New York City removed many deaths.
Jan. 4, 2023:
The Times is using C.D.C. data based on death certificates for locations that do not report deaths regularly or comprehensively.
The federal data updates approximately once a month and appears as a spike in deaths on the day it updates.
The Times is using C.D.C. data based on death certificates for locations that do not report deaths regularly or comprehensively.
The federal data updates approximately once a month and appears as a spike in deaths on the day it updates.
Dec. 8, 2022:
The Times is using C.D.C. data based on death certificates for locations that do not report deaths regularly or comprehensively.
The federal data updates approximately once a month and appears as a spike in deaths on the day it updates.
The Times is using C.D.C. data based on death certificates for locations that do not report deaths regularly or comprehensively.
The federal data updates approximately once a month and appears as a spike in deaths on the day it updates.
Nov. 11, 2022:
The Times began including death certificate data reconciled by the C.D.C., resulting in a one-day increase in total deaths.
The Times began including death certificate data reconciled by the C.D.C., resulting in a one-day increase in total deaths.
Oct. 26, 2022: New York City added many deaths.
New York City added many deaths.
Oct. 21, 2022: New York City added many deaths.
New York City added many deaths.
Dec. 25, 2021:
New York did not announce new cases and deaths for the Christmas holiday.
New York did not announce new cases and deaths for the Christmas holiday.
Aug. 11, 2021: New York City released three days of data at once, resulting in a high one-day total for the state.
New York City released three days of data at once, resulting in a high one-day total for the state.
March 24, 2021:
After a multiday disruption in reporting data, the New York City health department reported several days’ worth of data, leading to a spike in reported cases and deaths in New York State.
After a multiday disruption in reporting data, the New York City health department reported several days’ worth of data, leading to a spike in reported cases and deaths in New York State.
March 22, 2021:
The number of cases and deaths reported in the state was artificially low because New York City did not report new data.
The city health department said the reason was ongoing issues in receiving and processing data from New York State.
The number of cases and deaths reported in the state was artificially low because New York City did not report new data.
The city health department said the reason was ongoing issues in receiving and processing data from New York State.
March 21, 2021:
The number of cases and deaths reported in the state was artificially low because New York City did not report new data.
The city also announced that some counts for the most recent week were artificially low.
The number of cases and deaths reported in the state was artificially low because New York City did not report new data.
The city also announced that some counts for the most recent week were artificially low.
Aug. 20, 2020: New York City removed four previously reported deaths after reviewing records.
The state reported four new deaths in other counties.
New York City removed four previously reported deaths after reviewing records.
The state reported four new deaths in other counties.
Aug. 6, 2020:
Our database changed to record deaths of New York City residents instead of deaths that took place in New York City.
Our database changed to record deaths of New York City residents instead of deaths that took place in New York City.
June 30, 2020: New York City added a backlog of deaths from unspecified dates.
New York City added a backlog of deaths from unspecified dates.
May 6, 2020: New York State added many deaths from unspecified days after reconciling data from nursing homes and other care facilities.
The tallies on this page include probable and confirmed cases and deaths.
Confirmed cases and deaths, which are widely considered to be an undercount of the true toll, are counts of individuals whose coronavirus infections were confirmed by a molecular laboratory test.
Probable cases and deaths count individuals who meet criteria for other types of testing, symptoms and exposure, as developed by national and local governments.
Governments often revise data or report a single-day large increase in cases or deaths from unspecified days without historical revisions, which can cause an irregular pattern in the daily reported figures.
The Times is excluding these anomalies from seven-day averages when possible.
For agencies that do not report data every day, variation in the schedule on which cases or deaths are reported, such as around holidays, can also cause an irregular pattern in averages.
The Times uses an adjustment method to vary the number of days included in an average to remove these irregularities.
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. is testifying on government censorship Thursday before the Republican-led Select Subcommittee on the Weaponization of the Federal Government.
Often emotional and heated, Thursday’s hearing came as subcommittee chairman Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, portrayed what he claimed were examples of censorship, including a White House request to Twitter to remove a race-based post from Kennedy about COVID-19 vaccines.
“It’s why Mr. Kennedy is running for president — it’s to stop, to help us expose and stop what’s going on,” Jordan said.
Jordan argued that a tweet from Kennedy about the death of baseball legend Hank Aaron after he received a COVID-19 vaccine was “just pointing out facts,” The Hill reported.
“When you look at Mr. Kennedy’s tweet, there was nothing there that was factually inaccurate.
Hank Aaron, real person, great American, passed away after he got the vaccine.
Pointing out, just pointing out facts,” Jordan said.
Vaccines are widely credited with saving millions of lives.
COVID-19 vaccines are safe and effective, according to CDC research.
Aaron, a native of Mobile, died in 2021 at age 86, weeks after being vaccinated at the Morehouse School of Medicine.
“Makes me feel wonderful,” Aaron told AP.
“I don’t have any qualms about it at all, you know.
I feel quite proud of myself for doing something like this, you know.
It’s just a small thing that can help zillions of people in this country.”
“Mr. Aaron was a public health advocate and worked with us to help bridge the health equity gap in Atlanta and around the world.
His passing was not related to the vaccine, nor did he experience any side effects from the immunization.
He passed away peacefully in his sleep,” Morehouse told CBS 42.
A watchdog group asked Jordan to drop the invitation to Kennedy after he suggested COVID-19 could have been “ethnically targeted” to spare Ashkenazi Jews and Chinese people.
In those filmed remarks first published by The New York Post, Kennedy said “there is an argument” that COVID-19 “is ethnically targeted” and that it “attacks certain races disproportionately.”
After the video was made public, Kennedy posted on Twitter that his words were twisted and denied ever suggesting that COVID-19 was deliberately engineered to spare Jewish people.
He called for the Post’s article to be retracted.
COVID-19 cases in Philadelphia have remained especially low since April, with very few hospitalizations and deaths reported over the last four months.
Now, city health officials are seeing a recent uptick in new cases.
It’s a small increase, but health providers say it should prompt people to start preparing for more disease transmission and respiratory illness this fall and winter.
“It’s also something for people who are elderly, people who are immunosuppressed, they want to pay a little bit more attention,” Dr. Cheryl Bettigole, commissioner of the Philadelphia Department of Public Health, said.
Experts don’t yet know what’s driving the recent bump in cases.
A new coronavirus variant — EG.5 — has become the latest dominant circulating variant, but health officials said so far, there is no evidence that it causes any more severe illness than previous variants.
Bettigole said part of the recent uptick in cases could be due to waning immunity, “because it’s been a while since people had COVID or a while since they had their shots.”
Local hospitalizations remain low, Bettigole said, with a couple dozen people currently receiving treatment for COVID.
But hospitalizations are rising nationally, according to federal data.
A total of 18 people were newly admitted to Philadelphia hospitals for COVID-19 within the last five weeks, according to city data.
Bettigole said the health department will monitor hospitalizations closely for signs of widespread transmission in communities.
“I need to know at the point that people are starting to need to use the emergency room, because that can put a strain on our resources,” she said.
“It can bump other people who need care out.”
In elderly adults, the flu or common cold can often lead to complications.
Lifestyle changes, maintaining regular vaccinations, and improving personal hygiene habits can reduce the risk of illness.
Colds, flu, and other infections can lead to secondary conditions like pneumonia, bronchitis, or other infections.
If you have a chronic condition such as asthma or diabetes, a respiratory illness can worsen these.
Because of this, it’s important to make healthy choices to strengthen your immune system and reduce the likelihood of illness.
Follow these nine tips to stay healthy year-round.
1.
Get active Physical activity is an immune system booster .
The more you move, the more your body can fight infection.
The activity you partake in doesn’t have to be strenuous.
Low-impact exercises are effective, too.
You might consider biking, walking, swimming, or low impact aerobics.
If you can, engage in moderate-intensity exercise for about 20 to 30 minutes a day to reach the recommended total of 150 minutes a week .
Also, strengthen your muscles by lifting weights or doing yoga.
Learn more about the effect of exercise on the immune system.
3.
Diet changes A balanced diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and lean meats can support overall good health and support the immune system .
Fruits and vegetables are often good sources of antioxidants, which protect your cells from damage and keep your body healthy.
Meanwhile, protein helps maintain muscle and bone mass and supports immune function.
Protein consumption is particularly important for older adults to support strength, mobility, and quality of life.
You should also limit your consumption of sugary, salty, and fatty foods.
Reducing alcohol intake can also help support good health into old age.
Learn more about how dietary needs change as people age.
5. Learn how to manage stress Chronic stress increases your body’s production of the stress hormone cortisol.
Too much cortisol can disrupt different functions in your body, including your immune system.
To reduce stress, increase physical activity, get plenty of sleep, set reasonable expectations for yourself, and explore relaxing enjoyable activities.
6. Get plenty of rest Not only can sleep reduce your stress level, but sleep is how your body repairs itself.
For this reason, getting an adequate amount of sleep can result in a stronger immune system , making it easier for your body to fight off viruses.
Sleep is also important as you age because it can improve memory and concentration.
Aim for at least seven to nine hours of sleep per night.
7.
Vaccines and prevention Getting annual vaccinations is another way to stay healthy throughout the year.
If you’re 65 and older, discuss getting a high dose or adjuvant flu vaccine with your doctor.
Flu season is between October and May in the United States.
It takes about two weeks for the vaccine to be effective, and it reduces the risk of the flu by 40–60% when the vaccine strains match the circulating strains.
All people over 6 months of age should receive at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine.
Studies show that vaccination can significantly reduce the risk of severe symptoms.
HEALTHLINE’S CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE Stay informed with our live updates about the current COVID-19 outbreak.
Also, visit our coronavirus hub for more information on how to prepare, advice on prevention and treatment, and expert recommendations.
8.
Schedule annual physicals Scheduling a yearly checkup can also keep you healthy.
Always speak with your doctor if you have concerns about your health.
Conditions like diabetes and high blood pressure can go undetected.
Regular physical examinations will enable your doctor to diagnose any problems early.
Getting early treatment may prevent long-term complications.
Another way to protect yourself year-round is to avoid being close to people who are sick.
This is easier said than done.
But if there’s a flu outbreak in your area, limit contact with people who aren’t feeling well and avoid crowded areas until conditions improve.
If you must go out, protect yourself by wearing a face mask.
If you’re caring for someone with the flu, wear a face mask and gloves, and wash your hands frequently.
The UK Health Security Agency ( UKHSA ) Epidemiology Modelling Review Group ( EMRG ) shares these medium-term projections ( MTPs ) for coronavirus (COVID-19) hospitalisations and deaths with thanks to SPI-M-O , who contribute model outputs for the combined projections (not all modelling groups produce projections for both hospitalisations and deaths).
Medium-term projections
These medium-term projections ( MTPs ) for COVID-19 hospitalisations ± and deaths ¥ are not forecasts or predictions.
They represent a scenario in which the trajectory of the epidemic continues to follow the trends that were seen in data available to 4 July 2022.
Several modelling groups produce their own set of projections.
These individual projections are then combined to form consensus MTPs .
MTPs are provided for England, Wales and Scotland, for hospital admissions (Figure 1) (Insufficient models were available for Northern Ireland for a combined projection).
MTPs are provided for deaths for England (Figure 2), and MTPs are provided for English regional hospital admissions (Figure 3).
The number of deaths is currently low in Scotland, Northern Ireland, Wales and in the English regions.
Projecting forwards is difficult when numbers fall to very low levels, therefore projections for deaths are not provided for these nations and regions this week.
The delay between infection, developing symptoms, the need for hospital care, and death means the MTPs cannot fully reflect the impact of policy and behavioural changes in the 2 to 3 weeks prior to 4 July 2022.
An assumed effect of school holidays has been included.
Modelling groups have used their expert judgement and evidence from the UK Health Security Agency and other published studies when making assumptions about vaccine effectiveness.
Projections do not include the potential effects of any novel variants.
The delay between infection, developing symptoms, the need for hospital care, and death means it is unlikely that a novel variant will significantly alter the trajectories of hospitalisations and deaths in the timescales covered by these projections.
±
These are new hospitalisations per day which incorporates both the number of individuals admitted with COVID-19, as well as inpatients newly diagnosed with COVID-19.
Data definitions differ slightly across all 4 nations.
¥ These are the number of new deaths per day (by date of death) that are within 28 days of being identified as a COVID-19 case.
Data definitions differ slightly across all 4 nations.
Acknowledgements
UKHSA thanks SPI-M-O and academic partners for providing model outputs for these projections.
UKHSA also acknowledges the work developing combination estimates from Defence and Science Technology Laboratory and the support and collaboration of the SPI-M-O Secretariat and co-Chairs, as well as colleagues across the 4 nations.
Key
This key applies to all of the following fan charts.
All fan charts show the 90% credible interval (lighter shading) and interquartile range (darker shading) of the combined projections based on current trends.
Note axes scales differ for Figures.
England
Figure 1a.
Modelled projections of new hospital admissions per day in the UK nations based on data available on 4 July 2022
View key.
Number of patients admitted with confirmed COVID-19 and the number of inpatients diagnosed with COVID-19 in the past 24 hours.
Taken from NHS England COVID-19 situation reports.
Wales
Figure 1b.
Modelled projections of new hospital admissions per day in the UK nations based on data available on 4 July 2022
View key.
Number of patients admitted with confirmed COVID-19 by admission date and inpatients diagnosed with COVID-19 by test authorisation date.
Provided by Public Health Wales.
Scotland
Figure 1c.
Modelled projections of new hospital admissions per day in the UK nations based on data available on 4 July 2022
View key.
Number of patients who tested positive for COVID-19 in the 14 days prior to admission, on the day of admission, or during their stay in hospital.
Readmissions within 14 days of a positive test are excluded.
Provided by Public Health Scotland.
Data used for projections have a longer lag than previously, due to changes in reporting frequencies (from June 2022).
England
Figure 2a.
Modelled projections of COVID-19 deaths per day (by date of death) in the UK nations based on data available on 4 July 2022
View key.
The number of COVID-19 deaths (by date of death) within 28 days of being identified as a COVID-19 case.
The past data for England is taken from the UKHSA line list of deaths.
London
Figure 3a.
Modelled projections of new hospital admissions per day in the NHS England regions based on data available on 4 July 2022
View key.
Number of patients admitted with confirmed COVID-19 and the number of inpatients diagnosed with COVID-19 in the past 24 hours.
The past data is taken from the NHS England COVID-19 situation reports.
East of England
Figure 3b.
Modelled projections of new hospital admissions per day in the NHS England regions based on data available on 4 July 2022
View key.
Number of patients admitted with confirmed COVID-19 and the number of inpatients diagnosed with COVID-19 in the past 24 hours.
The past data is taken from the NHS England COVID-19 situation reports.
Midlands
Figure 3c.
Modelled projections of new hospital admissions per day in the NHS England regions based on data available on 4 July 2022
View key.
Number of patients admitted with confirmed COVID-19 and the number of inpatients diagnosed with COVID-19 in the past 24 hours.
The past data is taken from the NHS England COVID-19 situation reports.
North East and Yorkshire
Figure 3d.
Modelled projections of new hospital admissions per day in the NHS England regions based on data available on 4 July 2022
View key.
Number of patients admitted with confirmed COVID-19 and the number of inpatients diagnosed with COVID-19 in the past 24 hours.
The past data is taken from the NHS England COVID-19 situation reports.
North West
Figure 3e.
Modelled projections of new hospital admissions per day in the NHS England regions based on data available on 4 July 2022
View key.
Number of patients admitted with confirmed COVID-19 and the number of inpatients diagnosed with COVID-19 in the past 24 hours.
The past data is taken from the NHS England COVID-19 situation reports.
South East
Figure 3f.
Modelled projections of new hospital admissions per day in the NHS England regions based on data available on 4 July 2022
View key.
Number of patients admitted with confirmed COVID-19 and the number of inpatients diagnosed with COVID-19 in the past 24 hours.
The past data is taken from the NHS England COVID-19 situation reports.
South West
Figure 3g. Modelled projections of new hospital admissions per day in the NHS England regions based on data available on 4 July 2022
View key.
Number of patients admitted with confirmed COVID-19 and the number of inpatients diagnosed with COVID-19 in the past 24 hours.
The past data is taken from the NHS England COVID-19 situation reports.
Are you six months out from your Covid-19 bivalent booster and wondering when you’ll be able to get another shot?
If you live in the United Kingdom or Canada, you already have your answer.
The Canadian and U.K. governments, acting on recommendations from expert committees, plan to offer spring booster shots for people at highest risk of getting severely sick from Covid.
advertisement
But in the United States, there’s been radio silence from the Food and Drug Administration on the question of spring boosters, creating frustration among a small but determined group of people who are keen not to have to wait until the autumn to get another dose of Covid vaccine.
“I will tell you that patients message me every day about this,” Camille Kotton, clinical director for transplant and immunocompromised host infectious diseases at Massachusetts General Hospital, told STAT in an interview.
Jamie Loehr, a family medicine physician in Ithaca, N.Y., has patients who got the updated booster shot last fall now asking him to give them off-label permission slips for a second bivalent jab.
advertisement
“There are people who are actively wanting regular updates on this,” Loehr said during a discussion on the future of Covid vaccination during the late February meeting of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, a group of experts that advises the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on vaccination policy.
Loehr and Kotton are both members of the ACIP.
Despite the lack of guidance from the FDA, there is evidence that the agency was thinking about the issue even last fall.
In an interview with STAT in October, Peter Marks, director of the FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, acknowledged he was worried one booster a year might not suffice for older adults and people who are immunocompromised.
“I would be lying to you if [I said] it doesn’t keep me up at night worrying that there is a certain chance that we may have to deploy another booster — at least for a portion of the population, perhaps older individuals — before next September, October,” Marks said at that time.
The FDA declined a request to interview Marks for this article.
In an email, the agency sidestepped most of STAT’s questions, saying only on the issue of spring boosters that “We continue to closely monitor the emerging data in the United States and globally, and we will base any decision on additional updated boosters upon those data.”
The evidence to date suggests that Covid vaccines offer strong protection against severe disease, hospitalization, and death.
But their capacity to stave off infection is short-lived.
With that in mind, the U.K.’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation and Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization have both issued recommendations that high-risk individuals should be offered the opportunity to get a Covid booster shot this spring.
In the U.K., where an astonishing 82.5% of people aged 75 and older received a bivalent booster last fall, the recommendation is that people who are 75 and older, or who live in a care home for older adults, or who are 5 years and older and are immunocompromised should be offered a spring booster, as long as it has been six months since their last shot.
“To protect the most vulnerable in the population against becoming seriously unwell with Covid-19, JCVI’s view is that the provision of a spring booster dose for these people is a proportionate response in 2023,” the group said in a statement.
In announcing the recommendation, the head of immunization for the U.K. Health Security Agency pointed to a recent uptick of severe cases among the elderly.
“Covid-19 is still circulating widely, and we have recently seen increases in older people being hospitalized,” Mary Ramsey said.
NACI, the Canadian vaccine advisory group, recently voted to recommend that people should be allowed to get a spring booster if they are aged 80 or older, are adult residents of long-term care facilities, are 18 and older and are moderately or severely immunocompromised, or are aged 65 to 79, especially if they have no known history of previous Covid infection.
The U.K. recommendation is that the identified high-risk individuals “should” get another booster.
The Canadian expert panel issued a softer recommendation, saying the high-risk people it highlighted “may” get an additional dose this spring, an approach that in the language of public health is called a “permissive” recommendation.
Newsletters Sign up for Daily Recap A roundup of STAT's top stories of the day.
Please enter a valid email address.
Privacy Policy
The latter approach is one some people would like to see adopted in this country.
Loehr, the family medicine physician, told the February ACIP meeting he believes there should be annual Covid boosters but that people who are immunocompromised or aged 65 and older should have the option to get a second booster six months later, in consultation with a health care provider.
Michael Osterholm, director of the University of Minnesota’s Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy, would go further, saying people who are 50 and older in the U.S. should be offered the chance to get a second booster.
He noted that in the second half of 2022, 97.3% of people who died from Covid in this country were aged 50 and older.
“That’s a pretty targeted group you can go at,” Osterholm said.
He acknowledged what’s obvious to anyone who has been tracking uptake of the bivalent booster in the U.S.: Doctors’ offices and pharmacies would not face a tsunami of people seeking a spring booster, if one were allowed.
Only 16.3% of people eligible for the updated jab have received one; even among the highest-risk population, people aged 65 and older, fewer than half of those eligible — 41.6% — have gotten the shot.
“We currently live in a world where those that want additional booster doses really want them.
And those that don’t want them don’t want them at all.
And what we’re trying to do is thread that needle,” Osterholm said.
“I do think that given the data that we’ve seen on waning immunity over time, that if somebody wanted to be vaccinated every six months and if they were in a high-risk group by age or underlying health condition, then I think that should be permitted.
I don’t believe for a moment that it will be a widespread practice.”
At the February meeting of the ACIP, members were told that the Covid vaccine work group, a subset of its members, had debated whether spring boosters should be recommended.
But the group concluded it didn’t have enough evidence to say that another shot is needed at this time.
“The data weren’t conclusive to yet identify a need for frequent vaccines and there was concern that it may not be feasible to implement a vaccine program in all adults 65 and older twice a year,” Sara Oliver, a vaccine expert at the CDC, said at the meeting.
Oliver also noted, though, that the Covid work group recognized that older adults and people who are immunocompromised will likely remain more vulnerable to developing severe illness if they contract Covid, and there is probably a need to have more flexibility to address their situations going forward.
“I really like this idea about flexibility.
And if the FDA decides that there can be some enhanced flexibility around the recommendations, I think that will be helpful,” MGH’s Kotton said during the discussion.
But that flexibility doesn’t currently exist.
The bivalent Covid vaccines have not yet been licensed; they are being given under FDA Emergency Use Authorization.
The rules around EUAs are strict.
Products covered by EUAs can only be used in the way the FDA has ruled.
Once a vaccine is fully licensed, the ACIP has leeway to recommend use that differs from FDA’s licensing.
For instance, though the FDA appears poised to license new respiratory syncytial virus vaccines for people 60 and older, the ACIP’s RSV work group signaled in February that cost-benefit analyses did not favor use of the vaccines in people aged 60 to 64.
With no clearance from FDA for a spring booster, ACIP is not able to recommend one.
Though there are avid proponents of spring booster shots, not everyone is convinced they are needed.
“With hospitalizations and deaths trending down, there is not movement towards a spring booster,” Kathleen Neuzil, director of the Center for Vaccine Development at the University of Maryland Medical School, said in an email.
Neuzil noted there are other tools for high-risk people who contract Covid — antiviral drugs.
“These are underused for influenza … and we do not want them to be underused for Covid-19,” she said.
“They are an important tool particularly for older persons and the immunocompromised, and people should be encouraged to contact their health care providers early in their illness.”
In the interview with STAT, Kotton noted that things have improved substantially for immunocompromised people — her patient base — since earlier in the pandemic.
And that’s even though the monoclonal antibody product Evusheld, which had been used to help such patients avoid Covid infection, is no longer used because evolution of the virus that causes Covid has rendered it ineffective.
“I do want to say, big picture, we are seeing overall much lower rates of severe, life-threatening illness in immunocompromised and the elderly compared with before,” she said.
“For people who are fully vaccinated, including with a bivalent vaccine, and with ready access to treatments such as remdesivir, Paxlovid, and other additional treatments, we are seeing overall much better outcomes now compared to where we were, say, a year or previously.”
Kotton seemed uncertain of the value of authorizing a spring booster.
“We don’t want to just give doses because people are nervous, right?
We want to make sure that there is a good reason based on data that we would want to give additional doses of vaccine,” she said.
“So we’re basically waiting — waiting to hear more from the CDC and FDA.”
Los Angeles County's top health officials rolled up their sleeves and received updated COVID-19 booster shots Wednesday as they urged residents -- particularly those in groups at risk of severe illness from infection -- to receive the new inoculations now that they are available locally.
County Health Officer Dr. Muntu Davis and Public Health Director Barbara Ferrer both received the shot Wednesday at a county-run vaccination site at Ted Watkins Park in Watts.
Ferrer said the updated booster shot, which is engineered to specifically defend against currently circulating variations of COVID-19, is slowly becoming more widely available, and the county expects that in the coming weeks, the vaccinations should be available at more than 1,000 sites in the county.
She acknowledged that COVID hospitalization and death numbers remain low, but added, "They are not insignificant.
"
Get Southern California news, weather forecasts and entertainment stories to your inbox.
Sign up for NBC LA newsletters.
"Our own (local) data for the past 90 days shows that people who are not vaccinated against COVID-19 were three times more likely to be hospitalized and four times more likely to die from COVID-19 than people who were vaccinated," Ferrer said.
"This new vaccine is estimated to prevent about 400,000 hospitalizations and 40,000 deaths over the next two years.
In L.A. County, we've also seen that certain groups of people are more vulnerable for severe illness from COVID-19.
And this continues to be true, especially for older persons and people who are Black and Brown.''
While vaccination will not necessarily prevent someone from becoming infected, health officials said the shots are effective at preventing patients from becoming severely sick or dying from the virus.
Ferrer said hospitalization rates due to the virus remain elevated among Black residents, and among residents who are 65 years old or older.
The rates are even higher for people aged 80 and older.
"Because (vaccine) availability is less than we expected at this point, we do want to emphasize that people in those higher-risk groups should make their appointment or visit a site to get vaccinated earlier rather than later to make sure they have increased protection if transmission goes up," she said.
Residents can get real-time information on vaccine availability and vaccination locations online.
Ferrer noted that the vaccinations are provided for free at all county-operated vaccination sites.
Free vaccinations will also be available at many sites for people who are uninsured or under-insured, she said.
People who have insurance should be able to receive the shots without any out-of-pocket costs, but Ferrer said people should check with their insurance company to determine if they need to find an in-network provider to receive a cost-free shot.
CNN —
When the US Covid-19 public health emergency ends this month, coronavirus tests will still be available, but there will be changes to who pays for them.
Questions remain about exactly what those coverage changes will look like, but the guarantee of free testing will be lost for many – and some costs may shift to become out-of-pocket.
There are still ways to take advantage of the benefits provided by the public health emergency before it expires May 11.
For the past two years, the federal government has required private insurance companies to cover up to eight Covid-19 tests each month.
Packs of home tests can be found at pharmacies and other local retailers, and costs may be covered upfront or reimbursed by insurance plans.
The Biden administration launched COVIDtests.gov in January 2022 to allow US households to order free Covid-19 test kits to be delivered to home.
The site is still up and running, with four free tests available to any household that hasn’t ordered since December.
Also, the US Food and Drug Administration has extended the expiration date for many home tests beyond what is printed on the box.
Check the agency’s website before throwing them out.
“People should go out and ensure that they have tests available, because what we know about Covid is it’s quite pernicious, and clearly, people can get it more than once,” said Mara Aspinall, a professor at Arizona State University’s College of Health Solutions and a testing and diagnostics expert.
“It’s critical that people have the ability to test and then isolate or stay at home if they test positive.”
What will change after May 11?
Once the public health emergency ends, Covid-19 tests – both home tests and laboratory tests – will be subject to cost sharing, in which costs of services are divided between the patient and their insurance plan.
Private insurers will no longer be required to cover the costs of testing.
The federal government has encouraged continued coverage, but each company will ultimately be able to make their own decision.
So far, details on those plans are scarce.
The Blue Cross Blue Shield Association told CNN that it’s evaluating the best way to keep members informed of changes.
Moving into the next phase, coverage may include “reasonable limits” on tests.
“As COVID-19 becomes endemic, each Blue Cross and Blue Shield company is looking at how best to support access to diagnostic testing for COVID-19, just as is done for all other diagnostic testing,” said David Merritt, senior vice president of policy and advocacy for the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association.
“We are committed to protecting patients from unnecessary costs, while ensuring they receive the care they need, when they need it.”
Aetna told CNN that it did not have any details to share.
Cigna, Humana and UnitedHealthcare did not respond to multiple requests for comment.
Medicare Part B beneficiaries will continue to have coverage for lab tests when ordered by a provider, but the same will not apply for home tests.
For those on Medicaid plans, all tests will continue to be covered for free until the end of September 2024.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention will also continue to support uninsured individuals and socially vulnerable communities “pending resource availability,” according to a roadmap outlined by the US Department of Health and Human Services.
There may be other avenues to free or cheap testing, too – perhaps through state and local governments or other programs.
Recently, for example, the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services announced the expansion of a program that now allows all state residents to order free tests through June.
The Rockefeller Foundation, a private philanthropic organization, has also extended a public-private partnership program that works with states to get free tests to at-risk communities.
Shifting role of testing
“The testing phenomenon during Covid changed many times,” Aspinall said.
It was a core focus at the beginning, but the priority then shifted to vaccines, she said.
The initial Omicron wave brought a renewed interest in testing, and long waits for lab-based tests drove people to home tests.
“It put power and privacy in an individual consumer’s hand,” Aspinall said.
Millions of households took advantage of free Covid-19 tests provided by the federal government in the months after it launched, and a recent CDC report shows that the program helped to get kits to many who otherwise wouldn’t have tested and improved equity in testing overall.
About 60% of US households ordered a test kit from COVIDTests.gov, and nearly a third of all US households reported using at least one of those tests by April or May last year.
Nearly a quarter of people who reported using the government-provided tests said that they probably would not have tested for Covid-19 if not for the free kits, according to the report – suggesting that more than 13 million people took a Covid-19 test who otherwise wouldn’t have.
More than 1 in 5 people who used their free tests reported at least one positive result.
Overall, use of the free test kits was similar across racial and ethnic groups.
This is a “considerable difference” from other home test kits, where use was “highly inequitable,” according to the report.
Black people were more likely than White people to use tests provided through COVIDTests.gov but 72% less likely than White people to use other at-home test kits.
Now, however, Covid-19 cases are a third of what they were a year ago, and hospitalizations and deaths are about as low as they’ve ever been.
Testing rates have dropped significantly, too.
Along with the decreased transmission, the volume of testing may have dropped as people better understand what the course of an infection looks like, Aspinall said.
She estimates that people may use an average of one or two tests per incident, down from an average of five or six.
Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.
While Covid-19 “remains a public health priority,” the federal government says “we are in a better place in our response than we were three years ago, and we can transition away from the emergency phase.”
Still, experts agree that continued monitoring is key.
Advancements in technologies like wastewater surveillance have helped supplement dwindling testing data, but testing will continue to be an important tool for individuals to keep themselves and their loved ones safe and healthy.
“The public health emergency may be over but Covid is not over,” Aspinall said.
Key Takeaways The FDA recently authorized the first at-home diagnostic test that can identify both COVID-19 and the flu.
At present, you can only purchase the test through the manufacturer’s website.
By identifying whether you have COVID-19 or the flu, the test helps you determine which treatment you’ll need.
It’s always been challenging to distinguish COVID-19 and the flu from one another because they share similar symptoms.
Luckily, a new at-home diagnostic test offers a solution.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently issued an emergency use authorization (EUA) for the Lucira COVID-19 & Flu Home Test, the first over-the-counter test that can detect influenza A, influenza B, and SARS-CoV-2.
It requires self-collected nasal swab samples and provides results in about 30 minutes.
If you test positive for either flu or COVID-19, you should take precautions to avoid spreading the disease.
Because the test can identify which highly contagious virus is causing the infection, it’s easier for you to determine the appropriate medical care you need.
Purchase From the Manufacturer’s Website
At present, the test is only available on Lucira’s website.
It’s unclear when it will be made more widely available, Akira A. Shishido, MD, assistant professor in the division of infectious diseases at Virginia Commonwealth University, told Verywell.
“In theory, now that it is authorized for over-the-counter use, it should eventually be available at any drug store, pharmacy, grocery store, etc.—wherever you might find COVID-19 tests,” he said.
However, Lucira Health—which also manufactured the very first FDA-authorized at-home test kit for COVID-19—filed for bankruptcy days before they received regulatory authorization.
Given their bankruptcy, the roll-out of the new COVID-19 and flu test might be affected.
According to the press release, the company is looking for a financial partner to resume the manufacturing and development of additional home diagnostic products.
How the Test Works
Like the free at-home rapid COVID-19 tests distributed by the federal government, the Lucira COVID-19 & Flu test relies on self-collected nasal swab samples.
But they’re not the same kind of tests.
At-home COVID-19 tests are usually antigen tests, which means they detect the presence of a specific viral antigen.
This new COVID-19 and flu test is a nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT), which detects nucleic acid from SARS-CoV-2, influenza A, and influenza B.
You swirl the sample swab in a vial and place it in the test unit.
After about 30 minutes, the test kit will show whether you’re positive or negative for influenza A, influenza B, and COVID-19.
Among symptomatic individuals, the test correctly identified 99.3% of negative and 90% of positive influenza A samples, as well as 99.9% of negative influenza B samples.
For COVID-19, it identified 100% of negative and 88.3% of positive COVID-19 samples.
NAAT is more sensitive than standard at-home tests and less likely to yield a false negative, Shishido said.
The practice of testing twice for COVID-19 to improve testing accuracy generally applies to antigen tests.
"While there are always exceptions, repeat testing with this test while symptomatic is likely not necessary," he said.
Anjali Majumdar, MD, infectious disease physician at the Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, told Verywell that it may be more worthwhile to use the Lucira test as a confirmatory step when testing for COVID, like using it after getting a negative result from an antigen test.
Still, the FDA warns that there is a risk of false positive and false negative results, just like with any rapid diagnostic test.
How to Use the Results
The new COVID-19 and flu test is another tool that supports public health needs.
Knowing that you are infected allows you to take precautions and reduce the spread of the virus.
“If a person tests positive for influenza on this platform, it is important to follow proper isolation as outlined by CDC which is different from isolation procedures for COVID-19,” Majumdar said.
“Generally, for influenza, it is advised that individuals stay home until at least 24 hours after their last fever.”
Aside from identifying which virus you have, Andy Pekosz, PhD, a virologist at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health and co-director of the Johns Hopkins Center of Excellence for Influenza Research and Response, told Verywell that the other benefit of the test is knowing which antiviral you need.
“There are different antivirals for COVID and for influenza, and this test should allow you to determine which one you should get,” he said.
“This is especially important for the elderly and people with preexisting conditions that make them more susceptible to severe disease.”
If you test negative for both COVID-19 and the flu but continue to have symptoms, you still might have a respiratory infection.
Refrain from going to crowded places to avoid spreading whatever illness is causing your sickness.
“There are a lot of viruses and bacteria that can cause influenza-like illness,” Pekosz said.
“It’s always good to be cautious and not go out if you aren’t feeling well.”
It’s possible to have both COVID-19 and the flu at the same time, but it rarely happens, Pekosz said.
Even so, Lucira’s test will be able to detect that.
What This Means For You The FDA authorized the first over-the-counter test that can detect influenza A, influenza B, and SARS-CoV-2.
You don’t need a prescription to buy it, however, the test is only available through the manufacturer’s website at the moment.
The information in this article is current as of the date listed, which means newer information may be available when you read this.
For the most recent updates on COVID-19, visit our coronavirus news page.
The omicron variant of the coronavirus was first detected in late 2021.
It has since swept the globe, eventually vanquishing other variants including delta.
Omicron soon began branching off into a number of subvariants: BA.2 took off in the spring, and BA.5 came to dominate towards the end of the summer.
In late fall, the subvariants B.Q.1 and B.Q.1.1 together became the predominant form of the virus in the United States.
They are not alone — other omicron subvariants including XBB, BF.7 and yes, still BA.5 are also out there.
But do they cause more severe illness?
Here’s what experts have to say about the infection symptoms caused by the latest omicron subvariants.
What are the symptoms of omicron subvariants?
The symptoms of the latest omicron subvariants are mostly similar to those of the earlier version of omicron.
Dr. Roy Gulick, the chief of infectious diseases at Weill Cornell Medical Center and NewYork-Presbyterian, said typical symptoms of the omicron subvariants include:
Sore throat
Hoarse voice
Cough
Fatigue
Nasal congestion
Runny nose
Headache
Muscle aches
Unlike earlier variants like delta that affected the lungs, omicron and its subvariants tend to cause more upper respiratory symptoms, said Dr. Armando Meza, chief of infectious disease at Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center in El Paso.
Those symptoms can include congestion, sore throat and changes in taste and smell.
Dr. Joseph Khabbaza, a pulmonary and critical care physician at the Cleveland Clinic, said symptoms can be vague, similar to what is seen with any kind of flu-like virus.
Still, it is virtually impossible for people to rely on symptoms to self-diagnose an illness.
Doctors urge people who have any cold symptoms or flu-like symptoms to get tested.
Meza noted that when people are tested for Covid, the tests don’t look for which variant the person has.
“We assume that the most prevalent variant in the community is the one that they got infected with,” he said.
“There really shouldn’t be a big difference in terms [of symptoms] that you can tell one from the other.
It’s really more of a subtle difference that you find out after the fact.”
Does the vaccine or booster protect against the omicron subvariants?
In August, the Food and Drug Administration authorized a new version of the Covid booster that targets the spike protein of both the BA.4 and BA.5 subvariants.
This booster also targets the original strain of the virus that was first detected in Wuhan, China, in late 2019.
As of December, the updated booster has been authorized for everyone ages 6 months and older.
During the first omicron wave, the variant caused a milder illness in people who were up to date on their Covid vaccinations.
Researchers from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported in November that the updated bivalent booster was better at preventing symptomatic Covid infections than the original booster shots.
Later CDC research found that the updated boosters are more effective at preventing hospitalization than the original booster, particularly for adults ages 65 and up.
Do the omicron subvariants cause severe illness?
Omicron and its subvariants have, for the most part, caused less fatal infections than previous variants, Meza said, especially compared to what was seen with the delta variant and the original strain of the virus.
Part of the decrease in severity may be because the virus tends not to burrow deeply into the lungs as much as previous variants, but remains higher up in the respiratory tract, experts say.
In that way, the illness may act more like bronchitis than pneumonia, said Dr. Hugh Cassiere, the director of critical care services for Sandra Atlas Bass Heart Hospital at North Shore University Hospital on Long Island, New York.
“Usually patients with acute bronchitis tend not to be short of breath.
They tend to cough and produce sputum,” Cassiere said.
“Patients with pneumonia tend to be short of breath and feel more fatigued than bronchitis in general.”
Khabbaza said that recently, Covid cases he’s seen in the ICU have had a lesser degree of severity than earlier in the pandemic: Patients haven’t needed to be on oxygen for as long and have stayed in the hospital for shorter periods of time.
Another possible factor in decreased severity is increased prior immunity.
“People are also getting less sick because their immune system has seen it already,” Khabbaza said.
When do omicron subvariant symptoms start?
The time it takes for an infected person to develop symptoms after an exposure is shorter for the omicron variant than for previous variants — from a full week down to as little as three days or less, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
That still appears to be the case with the latest slew of subvariants.
“Most patients are coming in with three or four days of incubation,” Meza said.
Dr. Anita Gupta, an anesthesiologist and critical care physician at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, said it’s possible that the incubation period could be shorter or longer depending on a number of variables, including age, underlying health problems and vaccination status: “There is no hard-and-fast rule here.”
In fact, prior immunity may play a role in symptoms appearing sooner after infection.
That’s because the immune cells attacking the virus, rather than the virus itself, can be the cause of symptoms.
“Now that most of us have some combination of vaccine or infection that our immune system has seen Covid, it’s almost like you have an army of immune cells ready to pounce once the virus enters you,” Khabbaza said.
How long do omicron subvariant symptoms last?
Earlier in the pandemic, Covid symptoms could drag on.
“A lot of these patients are not having the symptoms for the 10 to 12 days that I saw when there were no vaccinations,” said Dr. Rahul Sharma, the emergency physician-in-chief at NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medicine.
Sharma noted that, in general, symptoms appear to be shorter and milder in vaccinated people compared to unvaccinated people.
For vaccinated people, emergency room or hospital stays are also typically shorter with the omicron subvariants, Sharma said.
“What I can tell you is that patients that are unvaccinated are definitely our sicker patients,” Sharma said.
“Those are the patients that are more likely to go to the ICU.
Those are the patients that are more likely to be admitted to the hospital.”
Dr. Ryan Maves, an infectious diseases and critical care physician at Wake Forest University School of Medicine in North Carolina, agreed, saying the overwhelming majority of Covid patients he sees in the intensive care unit are unvaccinated.
When should I get tested for Covid?
Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious diseases expert at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville, Tennessee, advised that anyone who has been in contact with an infected person get tested about 72 hours after the exposure.
“If you’ve been exposed and now you’re asking yourself, ‘When should I get tested?’
I think you would best wait at least three days to see if you’ve turned positive,” he said.
If you have a known exposure to someone with Covid but don’t have any symptoms, the CDC recommends waiting at least five full days before testing.
How long am I contagious with an omicron subvariant?
A person is generally contagious a day or two before symptoms begin and at least two or three days after.
Then, as the immune system kicks in, contagiousness should start to go down.
The CDC recommends that during the first five days of a mild Covid illness, you should isolate to avoid spreading the infection to others.
Then, if you no longer have symptoms, wear a mask around others for the next five days.
If you test negative on two consecutive rapid tests 48 hours apart, you can take the mask off before day 10, the CDC says.
Could infection with an omicron subvariant lead to long Covid?
During the first omicron wave, some experts said the variant could lead to long Covid, even with mild cases.
A June study from British researchers found that the omicron variant appears less likely to cause long Covid symptoms than delta, although all of the 41,361 adult participants who regularly reported their Covid symptoms on a phone app had been vaccinated.
Patients with long-term symptoms can experience crushing fatigue, irregular heart rhythms and other issues months after their initial Covid infections.
That occurred during the first wave of the pandemic, and it continued to lead to long Covid issues through the delta wave.
Previous research suggests that vaccination can reduce the risk for long Covid.
Follow NBC HEALTH on Twitter & Facebook.
The scale of the Special Investigating Unit’s (SIU) investigations is evident from the fact that they report probing 5,513 contracts given to 3,058 service providers.
Thus far, irregularities have been identified in 2,965 contracts – to the tune of R8.8bn.
The 277-page report is available on the Presidency’s website.
The SIU summarises its findings in the tables below:
Much of the latest report is a recap, in table form, of investigations, outcomes and recommendations that have been covered in its eight earlier reports under Proclamation R23.
Read more in Daily Maverick: Latest SIU report reveals billions more rands of unlawful and dodgy Covid-19 spending exposed
However, what is becoming clearer is that the effectiveness of the SIU’s investigation will ultimately depend on the willingness and capacity of political and criminal authorities to vigorously pursue its recommendations.
For example, as the SIU table below illustrates:
456 referrals for disciplinary action have been made to government departments… but thus far very few have been acted on.
476 referrals have been made to “the relevant prosecuting authority” – it is unknown how many of these are being pursued.
In addition, the report begs questions about the capacity of the Special Tribunal, the legal body with the power to nullify irregular and illegal contracts.
Although the Special Tribunal has played a pioneering role since it was established, its work has often been hampered by legal challenges to its authority, now empowered by an important decision in its favour by the Constitutional Court in the Ledla matter.
Sources contacted by Daily Maverick worry about the fact that the Special Tribunal has only one full-time judge – Judge Lebogang Modiba.
Of the five other judges assigned to it, only two are believed to be active on the Tribunal.
Yet there are now 59 matters requiring its attention under this proclamation alone.
The result of this should be of concern to the public in South Africa.
It poses a real danger that officials found to have been involved in corrupt activities may never face legal or even disciplinary action, and that monies may never be recovered.
Thus, although irregularities to the value of R8.8-billion have so far been found by the SIU under Proclamation R23, the value of matters enrolled at the Tribunal is less than R2.5-billion and the rand value of cash and/or assets actually recovered so far is a mere R36-million.
This is a vast disjuncture, amounting to less than half a percent.
Clearly, there is a lot of work to be done.
Specific findings by the SIU
Daily Maverick is carefully studying the latest report.
However, some of the latest findings on the matters that have been finalised confirm suspicions raised from investigations we conducted in 2020.
In particular, we were the first to raise the alarm about the construction of four new field ICU hospitals built using alternative building technology (ABT).
In particular, we questioned their cost, the process by which contractors were appointed and delays in their construction which meant they were still unfinished for the first two major waves of Covid.
Read more in Daily Maverick: Gauteng ICU field hospitals: Suspensions, shenanigans and unanswered questions
Read more in Daily Maverick: Gauteng’s ‘new’ R1.2bn Covid-19 ICU hospitals still lie abandoned, unfinished or underused
In response to an investigation initiated after a complaint by former Gauteng Premier David Makhura, the SIU has found that the Principal Submitting Person – the architect who is responsible for overseeing the entire project – was not lawfully appointed, noting that: “no proper selection process was followed in terms of section 217 of the Constitution in that only one service provider was approached by the Gauteng Department of Infrastructure Development on behalf of GDOH.”
However, after investigation of each of the ABT contracts, the SIU found that three of the four were properly fulfilled within timeframes and adjusted budgets and that the hospitals were built.
Concerning Kopanong Hospital, however, they found “fruitless and wasteful expenditure” totalling more than R44-million “as the building is incomplete and abandoned.
The buildings were never occupied or used for the intended purpose”.
The SIU’s report notes that there is an ongoing civil action between Condocor (Pty) Ltd, the building contractor, and the Gauteng health department, and on this basis say that they will await the outcome “to determine possible future action” to recover the monies.
They also recommend that “disciplinary steps be instituted against the then Acting HOD: Gauteng DID (Mr R Makhumisani) and the then SCM Manager of Gauteng DID in respect of the contract for the construction of Kopanong Hospital”.
These latest findings mean that, taking into account the nearly R500-million wasted expenditure on upgrading the Ashanti Gold hospital in Carletonville, more than R750-million has been blown by the Gauteng health department on new or refurbished hospitals that were never to be.
Read more in Daily Maverick: R700m abandoned Carletonville hospital vandalised – Germiston City News
And yet, no heads have rolled.
Red Roses Africa/Mainstreet 699 (Pty) Ltd
In addition, the latest SIU report updates its earlier findings on a matter previously reported on extensively by Daily Maverick:
Read more in Daily Maverick: Now for the big fish:
Competition Tribunal finds hand sanitiser supplier to SAPS guilty of excessive pricing
Once more, it states that a contract worth R596-million with Mainstreet Africa 699 (Pty) Ltd, for the supply of PPE to the SA Police Service (SAPS) “was unlawful” because it was an “unsolicited proposal” by a company that is not a sole supplier of medical products and because procurement processes had not been followed.
However, the SIU report itself is unusual because it departs from its regular format and contains no recommendations for future action, “noting” only that “Mr B Qwabe the Director of Mainstreet (Pty) Ltd was offered a platform by the SIU to give his account of what transpired with the SAPS PPE contract but he opted not to use the opportunity”.
Daily Maverick believes that this means this investigation, involving the most expensive PPE contract of the entire pandemic, is one of the 9.8% of matters that the SIU reports have still not completed and are therefore ongoing.
To be continued…DM/MC
Ask Patricia Anderson how she is doing, and you probably will not get a routine answer.
“Today, I’m working and I’m fine,” she said on a recent Tuesday.
“Saturday and Sunday, I was bedridden.
Long Covid is a roller coaster.”
Before the pandemic, Ms. Anderson practiced martial arts and did without a car, instead walking and taking buses around Ann Arbor, Mich., where she is a medical librarian.
Just before contracting Covid-19 in March 2020, she had racked up — oh, she keeps track — 11,409 steps in one day.
The virus caused extreme chills, shortness of breath, a nervous system disorder and such cognitive decline that, for months, Ms. Anderson was unable to read a book.
“I was very sick for a long time, and I never really got better,” she said.
On some days, fatigue cut her step count to three digits.
Rehabilitation attempts brought progress, then crashes.
The peripersonal and interpersonal space
The COVID-19 pandemic has changed our perception of the world, of ourselves and other people.
Social distancing rules suggest that people should keep an interpersonal distance of at least 1 m (3 feet), as recommended by the World Health Organization.
While Australia, China, Denmark, France, Hong Kong and Singapore stuck to this rule, several countries, such as India and Canada extended this distance to 2 m, Great Britain to 1 + m, but Germany, Switzerland, Belgium, Greece, Germany, Italy, Spain, Portugal and many other European countries recommended up to 1.5 m. The USA and South Korea prescribed distances of 1.8 m and 1.4 m, respectively.
These demands of social distancing challenge our natural proxemic behaviors as well as our spatial estimation abilities.
Normally, a comfortable interpersonal distance to other individuals is a matter of cultural conventions1 and is further modulated by our cognitive representation of our peripersonal space—the space surrounding our body2.
In particular, this space is influenced by our arm length as well as by emotional reactions triggered by another individual located within our peripersonal space3.
That means that peripersonal space and interpersonal distance are closely related to each other and share common motor resources4.
Peripersonal space describes reachability distance for objects while interpersonal distance refers to comfortable distance to others5.
Moreover, both the peripersonal space and, as a consequence, the comfortable interpersonal distance increase after using a long tool, which is known as an enlargement effect6.We briefly review the two concepts of peripersonal space and interpersonal distance to motivate our study.
The peripersonal space
Within peripersonal space we make use of action opportunities and escape danger.
The term was coined by Rizolatti and colleagues in a seminal study that found specific neurons of a monkey activated by stimuli in the near-body space7.
The major functions of peripersonal space are considered to be multisensory integration of stimuli and action preparation.
While an approximate size of peripersonal space was earlier estimated as about 30–50 cm around the hands and 60 cm around the head8, recent studies bring evidence that it is rather flexible and can be modulated by different factors, such as pregnancy9, reward10, environment temperature11 and pressure12, tool use13,14,15, hormone administration16 and even cultural belonging17.
Moreover, social factors, such as the presence of another individual, can modulate the size of peripersonal space18.
Teneggi and colleagues18 demonstrated that the boundaries of peripersonal space shrank when participants faced another individual and merged when individuals behaved cooperatively.
Especially sensitive to such situative influences is the peripersonal space in the area near the face19.
Thus, peripersonal space and interpersonal distance are interrelated and share common mechanisms of self-protection5.
It was demonstrated that social information can modulate both in a similar way3.
Several studies have investigated the relation between social distancing, comfortable interpersonal distance, peripersonal space boundaries and danger perception, as well as human approaching and distancing endeavors.
More recently, the COVID-19 pandemic has had an impact on these relations, as the perception of danger has changed in the course of different pandemic waves and with the introduction of various safety regulations.
There is evidence that the presence of a threatening stimulus near the body alters the representation of peripersonal space by changing our perceived reaching range20,21,22.
In terms of the COVID-19 pandemic, a face mask could be such a threatening stimulus because it signals a contamination risk, and enlarges our peripersonal space.
On the other hand, in the context of the pandemic a mask might also be considered as a safety tool, thereby shrinking our peripersonal space as well as interpersonal distance22,23.
It is of note that the modulation of peripersonal space in the context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic is most probably caused by the subjective perception of danger rather than by a real danger24.
This perception, in its turn, can depend on multiple factors including one’s own infection history, anxiety, risks, beliefs about the disease, and perceived vulnerability, for example, due to age.
Thus, it was often pointed out that the elderly are especially vulnerable to the infection.
A recent study, conducted in Switzerland in the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic showed a reduction of peripersonal space due to social distancing25.
The authors adapted a classical multisensory task that is normally used to measure peripersonal space.
Participants had to respond as fast as possible to a tactile stimulation on their faces.
In the visuo-tactile (multimodal) stimulation condition, an avatar was approaching them in virtual reality from different distances.
In the only tactile (unimodal) stimulation condition they only had to respond to the stimulation on their faces.
The measurements were done at three time points: in the Pre-Pandemic phase (June–July 2018), in the Pre-Lockdown phase (10 February–10 March 2020), and in the Post-Lockdown phase (10 June–25 July 2020).
In all but the Post-Lockdown cohorts, multimodal reaction times were significantly faster than unimodal ones (a facilitation effect).
Only in the Post-Lockdown Cohort, avatars at farther locations elicited less facilitation on tactile processing (measured as reaction times), thus demonstrating a reduction of peripersonal space representation.
The authors explained this phenomenon by invoking the “freezing” mechanism in a situation of danger26.
Other individuals do not trigger any anticipatory processing when at a far distance, but a stronger tactile processing when at potential contamination distance.
Sakuma and Ikeda27 found an unexpected increase in peripersonal space in a study with a masked face condition compared to an unmasked face condition.
This suggests that the perceived interpersonal distance was shorter when the approaching face was unmasked rather than masked, which might reflect a wish to adopt a larger distance to an unmasked person, in order to keep safe.
Comfortable interpersonal distance
A preferred interpersonal distance is calculated within the first 600 ms of a social encounter28.
Interpersonal distance is subject to modulation by gender, age and the degree of cooperation29.
According to the Equilibrium theory, comfortable interpersonal distance is a compromise of approach and avoidance forces30.
In particular, comfortable interpersonal distance reduces in cooperative tasks, while interaction at larger distances causes discomfort28.
On the contrary, social threat31, arousal32 and contamination danger33,34,35 increase comfortable interpersonal distance.
One of the first studies on effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on interpersonal distancing was conducted by Marchiori and colleagues36 in Italy.
Using a self-made social-distancing belt, the researcher measured the distance people adopted to an unmasked person, as well as from a person wearing different types of masks and goggles.
The results were paradoxical: The distance adapted to a masked person was larger than the distance adapted to an unmasked person.
This finding can be accounted for by invoking danger avoidance behaviors; since at the beginning of the pandemic wearing a mask was still unusual and probably meant that the person might have contracted COVID-19 or was contagious.
To the same conclusion came Seres and colleagues37 who measured the influence of wearing a face mask in public waiting lines both when masks were mandatory and when they were not.
In both cases the mask increased the comfortable distance between persons.
On the whole, as an interview study in Germany showed, the comfortable interpersonal distance was larger during the COVID-19 pandemic than before, especially during the pandemic peaks38.
Contrary to these findings, a later online study conducted with French participants found that wearing a mask rather reduces the comfortable interpersonal distance because people with a mask were considered to be more trustworthy23.
Participants had to state their preferred interpersonal distance when facing human-like characters that were either wearing a face mask or displaying a neutral, happy or angry facial expression.
Interestingly, the comfortable distance was more reduced in participants infected with COVID-19.
These findings were corroborated by an Italian study39, but only for males.
For females, the crucial factor in choosing a distance to a face was its emotional expression.
The female participants adopted a shorter distance to happy faces than to angry ones.
There is further evidence of reduction of the comfortable interpersonal distance towards individuals wearing protective equipment and who were tested negative to COVID-1940.
The latest study done in virtual reality also supported the evidence of a comfortable interpersonal distance reduction when either the participant and/or the virtual agent wore a mask41.
In general, most studies showed an increase of interpersonal distance as a reaction to the pandemic and social distancing, but its reduction when the interlocutor wore a mask.
Little is known about peripersonal space in the pandemic, though.
Table 1 gives an overview of the results of previous research.
Table 1 Overview of studies on peripersonal space and interpersonal distance.
Full size table
While there are still protests against masks or social distancing42, it is crucial to understand how peripersonal space and, in connection to this, interpersonal distance vary with such factors as a face mask and social behavior, such as intention to interact, and how these factors might change our social interactions.
To this end, it is important to relate the face mask to interpersonal space.
The present study
Previous studies in the context of COVID-19 evaluated the comfortable interpersonal distance or peripersonal space with explicit measures23,38,39.
Although explicit and implicit measures are often related43,44, this relationship is moderated by multiple factors such as self-presentation, evaluative strength or automaticity, and distinctiveness45.
Self-presentation presupposes concerns about the objectivity of self-reports, strength deals with the potency and importance of the evaluation, while distinctiveness is perception of one’s evaluation as unique in comparison to others.
These factors are especially critical when estimating comfortable interpersonal distances in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic in the following ways.
First, self-presentation can be biased by the forced social distancing (either by adhering to it or by confronting it).
Second, evaluative strength can be modulated by the automatically preferred social distance or by the automatically processed contamination danger.
Third, distinctiveness can be challenged by individuals’ ability to estimate distances.
Bearing in mind these considerations, we preferred an implicit measure in our study.
In an online experiment, participants had to judge the gender of depicted persons.
The pictures presented to them showed two individuals standing in three different distances to each other, either interacting by initiating or conducting a handshake or not, and either wearing a face mask or not.
Judgments were recorded via button presses and participants were instructed to respond fast.
Predictions
In general, reaction times can be interpreted in two ways.
On the one hand, shorter reaction times are known to reflect an approach tendency to positive stimuli while longer reaction times reflect avoiding tendencies (positivity bias46).
For instance, faster reaction times have been observed to positive faces46 compared to negative ones.
On the other hand, an opposite pattern of responses—the negativity bias47 and faster reaction times for negative stimuli—has been documented in several studies with negative compared to positive words48 or faces49.
In accordance with the studies by Cartaud and colleagues23, Calbi and colleagues39, Sakuma and Ikeda27 and Welsch and colleagues38, we predict that the further individuals are in the pictures, the faster participants’ reaction times will be (positivity bias) (H1).
In addition, we predict faster reaction times for pictures with a face mask compared to pictures without a face mask (positivity bias) (H2).
Participants will prefer pictures with face masks because they evaluate them in a positive way.
Moreover, we predict slower reactions when there is social interaction compared to no interaction, again, due to a preference in not having social interaction and running the risk of being contaminated (positivity bias) (H3).
Shaking hands is not appropriate in the times of the COVID-19 pandemic and should be avoided.
Thus, based on previous research we postulate that a face mask rather reduces interpersonal distance and, presumably, peripersonal space, by signaling safety and trust, while in general interpersonal distance has increased in accordance with the social distancing rules and danger perception.
Crucially, we predict an interaction effect of face mask and social-interaction in dependence of the distance between the individuals, with slowest reaction times at near and middle distances without a mask as an avoidance signature and with fast reaction times for larger distances with a face mask (H4).
However, due to the partially exploratory nature of the study, we cannot completely rule out the alternative pattern (negativity bias), with faster reaction times due to an avoidance intention of an interaction with a face mask and at a closer distance.
We also explore possible interactions with demographic variables as well as attitudes towards different aspects of COVID-19 pandemic (see “Measures”).
Whitmer says she made difficult calls to close businesses and schools to keep Michigan safe.
Related:
“We make tough decisions because lives are on the line,” Whitmer said during last week’s debate.
“Studies have shown that our actions have saved thousands of lives.”
Dixon says Whitmer’s orders were too severe, hurting both the economy and the state’s K-12 students.
“She destroyed our small business community, stole years of schooling from our kids and forced hard-working Michiganders to follow her intrusive orders that picked winners and losers,” Dixon said in a statement to Bridge Michigan.
A Bridge Michigan analysis finds that both candidates have evidence to support parts of their arguments.
There are multiple studies suggesting Michigan COVID-19 orders prevented deaths, but the cost — in the state as elsewhere — was a damaged economy and substantial learning loss.
Michigan and other northeast states were among those that had the most COVID-19 cases in the first few months of the pandemic, before protocols were developed to treat the disease that eventually killed more than 35,000 in Michigan and 6.5 million worldwide.
Now, more than two years later, both sides have occasionally engaged in revisionist history.
Whitmer’ first TV ad of the campaign says she “made it a priority to get kids back in class.”
It doesn’t mention that Michigan schools stayed remote far longer than many other states, and Whitmer didn’t urge schools to reopen until March 2021.
At last week’s debate, Whitmer acknowledged she would have done some things differently with the benefit of hindsight, but did not elaborate.
Dixon has been relentless in her criticism of Whitmer’s orders, but has issued only broad statements about what she would have changed, telling Bridge there would have been “no restrictions and mandates that were outright confusing and cruel.”
Here’s a look at what Whitmer did — and didn’t — do, how it compares with peers in other states and how that impacted Michigan.
Business
What Whitmer did
As the pandemic rapidly unfolded in March 2020, Whitmer joined governors nationwide in closing K-12 schools and putting the brakes on the economy.
Whitmer’s first “stay-home” order began March 24, prohibiting all but essential businesses from operating in-person and calling on people to not leave their houses except for essential trips, like grocery shopping or the pharmacy.
That initial order lasted 73 days.
Restrictions on businesses remained for many more months, with employers ordered to allow remote work if possible until June 2021.
Rules on employee safety, which called for masks, social distancing, health screenings and more, began in the autumn 2020 and weren’t relaxed until May 2021.
For much of the first year of the pandemic, indoor dining at the state’s more than 16,500 bars and restaurants was forbidden or limited to 50 percent capacity.
Whitmer’s orders initially adhered to the federal definition of “essential” work.
Whitmer’s administration interpreted those rules to mean stores had to close paint, gardening and flooring aisles.
Some outdoor work, like landscaping, couldn’t be done.
Residents could not travel to second homes or buy a car in person.
They could go to church and buy a bottle of liquor, but couldn’t return the bottles for the deposit.
When the state reopened in July 2020, the governor ordered that the public was required to wear masks in public spaces.
That order was lifted in June 2021.
After the Michigan Supreme Court ruled in October 2020 that Whitmer couldn’t unilaterally issue emergency orders, the state Department of Health and Human Services, whose director is appointed by the governor, began issuing similar orders.
In mid-November 2020, as new coronavirus cases were rapidly rising, Whitmer and Robert Gordon, then-state health director, announced a new “pause” on indoor dining at bars and restaurants to combat skyrocketing cases (there were other restrictions, like a prohibition on in-person classes for high-school students).
Limited in-door dining was allowed beginning in February 2021.
But capacity limits didn’t rise to 50 percent until June 1, 2021, and to 100 percent until July 1.
Once vaccines were approved, Whitmer rolled out her “Vacc to Normal” plan in April 2021 that gradually eased restrictions as vaccination rates increased.
That plan was shelved when vaccination rates in Michigan rose slower than other states.
Whitmer lifted remaining restrictions on July 1, 2021.
What other states did
Whitmer’s stay-home order lasted longer than almost all states.
Though most states in the nation adopted stay-home orders, only Oregon, New Jersey, California and New Hampshire had longer ones.
Among neighboring states, Illinois’ stay-home order lasted 70 days, followed by Ohio, 68, and Wisconsin, 62.
Indiana had the shortest order, 37 days, nearly half of Michigan.
Many states took similar actions regarding schools and masks but some, typically led by Republican governors, reacted differently, a sign of the deeply polarized atmosphere that had then-President Donald Trump tweeting “LIBERATE MICHIGAN!” in April 2020.
For instance, Ohio Republican Gov. Mike DeWine ordered a mask mandate for businesses when they were set to reopen in May 2020.
But DeWine reversed himself the next day, turning the mandate into a recommendation.
“Within the last 24 hours it’s really become clear to me that a mandatory mask requirement … for people who are shopping, going into a retail business is offensive to some of our fellow Ohioans,” DeWine said.
At the time, the Whitmer administration adopted its “pause” in wake of a fall surge of cases in November 2020, six other states had also closed restaurants and bars while another 20 adopted new restrictions.
People in 22 other states could still enjoy dine-in service in December 2020.
The fallout
There is little argument about what happened in Michigan.
It lost over 1 million jobs; the jobless rate hit 23 percent before rapidly declining.
Only Nevada, a state that relies heavily on tourism, an industry crushed by the pandemic, had a higher jobless rate.
MONTGOMERY – Governor Kay Ivey on Wednesday awarded $10 million of the State Fiscal Recovery Fund from the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) to establish COVID recovery grants for emergency services providers.
This program is an initiative of Governor Ivey and the Alabama Legislature to provide support to Alabama’s emergency services providers that have been financially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Eligible applicants for this grant program are volunteer rescue squads, E-911 Boards and emergency services providers which are not an agency or department of a city, county, state or federal government.
“Alabama’s emergency service providers greatly supported our communities throughout the pandemic, often times putting their own lives on the line to provide rapid care.
Now, we are in a position to return the favor and help them in their recovery efforts,” said Governor Ivey.
“I appreciate the Alabama Legislature for their partnership in making this critical funding available to our emergency service providers, and I encourage them to apply and utilize these funds to further invest in public safety services.”
The state of Alabama will offer grants in an amount up to $10,320 for providers that meet eligibility requirements.
The application period for the Alabama Emergency Services Provider Grant Program will be open from noon April 27 through noon May 13, 2022.
Alabama received $2.1 billion in ARPA funds.
The Alabama Legislature appropriated $136,796,346 of that to Alabama’s State Fiscal Recovery Revenue Replacement Fund with $10 million of these funds to be distributed to Alabama’s emergency services providers.
General information and application materials are available on the COVID-19 Recovery Grant Program Website: https://alabama.submittable.com/submit.
For questions, please contact the Coronavirus Recovery Funds Office at (334)353-2749 or [email protected].
Please include “Emergency Services Provider Grant Program” in the subject line of the email.
###
Share on Pinterest Irfan Khan/Los Angeles Times via Getty Images According to a new study, the risk of older people developing Alzheimer’s disease over a one-year period nearly doubled following a COVID-19 diagnosis.
The highest risk was observed in women ages 85 and older.
Researchers aren’t sure whether COVID-19 triggers the development of Alzheimer’s disease or if it quickens its emergence.
Coronavirus data All data and statistics are based on publicly available data at the time of publication.
Some information may be out of date.
Visit our coronavirus hub for the most recent information on COVID-19.
Was this helpful?
In a study published in the Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, researchers at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine found the risk of older people developing Alzheimer’s disease nearly doubled over a one-year period following COVID-19 infection.
Medical News Today spoke with Dr. Pamela Davis, the study’s co-author, a physician, and the Arline H. and Curtis F. Garvin Research Professor at Case Western Reserve School of Medicine.
Dr. Davis said the research team elected to do this study because they were interested in COVID-19’s impact on the brain and wondered if older people who contract COVID-19 might be at a higher risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease.
“Many people believe that for Alzheimer’s disease there is a combination of factors that work together to give you the cognitive impairment, and we were concerned that the kinds of things that happened during COVID-19 — the intense inflammation, and perhaps the kinds of direct action on the brain of the of the virus — might be a risk factor,” Dr. Davis said.
“So we went looking for that in our study.”
In 2021, Dr. Davis worked with a team of researchers on another study , which found that individuals with dementia had a greater risk of contracting COVID-19 and being hospitalized and dying from the disease than those without dementia.
Findings from the new study suggest that there may be “bidirectional relationships” between COVID-19 and Alzheimer’s disease.
Anonymous electronic health records For the study, the researchers used the TriNetX Analytics Platform, which provides clinical data and analytics, to access anonymous electronic health records of over 95 million people who made inpatient and outpatient visits at nearly 70 healthcare organizations.
The participants came from 50 states and represented diverse geographic, age, race/ethnicity, income, and insurance groups.
Next, the researchers narrowed the list of participants to a group of 6.2 million adults ages 65 and older who had received medical treatment between February 2020 and May 2021 and had no prior diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease.
Researchers then divided the participants into two groups: One group contracted COVID-19 between February 2020 and May 2021, and the other did not contract the disease during that time.
About 5.8 million participants were in the group with no infection, while more than 400,000 had COVID-19.
The researchers looked at the risk for a new diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease in the two groups as well as in three age groups (65 to 74, 75 to 84, and age 85 and older), men and women, and in Black, white, and Hispanic racial/ethnic groups.
Gender and age were the same in the COVID-19 cohort and the non-COVID-19 cohort.
However, the group that contracted COVID-19 did include more Hispanic and Black participants and had a “higher prevalence of adverse socioeconomic determinants of health and comorbidities,” according to the study.
Cohorts were propensity-score matched for demographics, adverse socio-economical determinants of health, including problems with education, occupational exposure, physical, social and psychosocial environment, and known risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease.
The researchers used a Kaplan-Meier analysis to estimate the likelihood of a new diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease within 360 days after a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Researchers used Cox’s proportional hazards model to compare matched cohorts using hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals.
Alzheimer’s disease risk nearly doubled Older people who had contracted COVID-19 had a higher risk — as much as 50 to 80% higher than the control group — of developing Alzheimer’s disease within a year.
The findings showed that the risk for developing Alzheimer’s disease in older people nearly doubled (0.35% to 0.68%) over one year following infection with COVID-19.
The highest risk was observed in women ages 85 and older.
With this kind of study, Davis cautioned, “we can’t say that [COVID-19] causes the increased Alzheimer’s disease diagnoses.”
“We can say that they are associated, but we cannot infer causality,” she stressed.
Heather Snyder, Ph.D., vice president of medical and scientific relations at the Alzheimer’s Association, told MNT there could be a few explanations for the results of this study.
“First, the pandemic presented serious delays for individuals seeking out medical diagnoses like Alzheimer’s disease, meaning these results could be driven by those who already had Alzheimer’s disease when they were infected but had not yet sought out a formal diagnosis,” Dr. Snyder explained.
“Alternatively, COVID-19 infection — which is linked to immune changes, including inflammation — may impact the onset of brain changes that are linked to Alzheimer’s disease and other dementia,” said Dr. Snyder.
“However, because this study only showed an association through medical records, we cannot know what the underlying mechanisms driving this association are without more research.”
More research needed Dr. Davis said more research needs to be done to understand any connections between COVID-19 and Alzheimer’s disease.
The Alzheimer’s Association hopes to begin answering some questions with its International SARS-CoV-2 Study, a network of studies aimed at understanding the long-term impact of SARS-CoV-2 on the brain.
“Because this virus is still relatively new, longitudinal research examining COVID-19 and dementia risk will take some time,” Dr. Snyder told MNT.
She said that her research team hopes to look at whether treatment of COVID-19 with antivirals mitigates the development of Alzheimer’s disease.
She pointed out that the participants of this study had COVID-19 before these treatments were available.
In a 2019 study, researchers at Case Western Reserve University found patients who used anti-tumor necrosis factor agents for inflammatory diseases had a reduced risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease.
“So we would look we would want to look at whether those patients when they get [COVID-19] also have their [COVID-19] risk mitigated,” Davis said.
“And that’s something that we can do relatively quickly in a retrospective study.”
*PRIME® has identified, reviewed, and mitigated all relevant financial relationships that speakers, authors, course directors, planners, peer reviewers, or relevant staff disclose prior to the delivery of any educational activity.
The following individuals have identified relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies to disclose:
Katharine J Bar, MD (Speaker)
Consultant – AbbVie
The following individuals have no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies to disclose:
Stephanie Joyce, PA, MSPAS, MS, RD (Reviewer)
Ricardo Correa, MD, EdD, FACP, FACE, FAPCR, FACMQ (Planner)
Michele B Kaufman, PharmD, BCGP (Planner)
All PRIME® staff participating in planning and content development have no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies to disclose.
WIMBLEDON, England — With the final match looming, this year’s edition of Wimbledon has already proven many points.
Rafael Nadal can play top-level tennis with a zombie foot and a tear in an abdominal muscle, but only for so long.
Iga Swiatek is beatable, at least on grass.
With the Moscow-born, Kazakhstan-representing Elena Rybakina making the women’s singles final, barring Russian players does not necessarily make a competition free of Russian players.
But perhaps most surprisingly, after 27 months of tournament cancellations, spectator-free events, constant testing and bubblelike environments, tennis may have finally moved past Covid-19.
For nearly two years, longer than just about every other major sport, tennis struggled to coexist with the pandemic.
Introduction
Nearly three years after its onset, work-from-home (WFH) technologies and their effects are one of the most important and enduring economic legacies of the COVID-19 pandemic (Barrero, et al., 2021).
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 27.6 million Americans reported primarily working from home in 2021, triple the size of that population in 2019.1 In response to this revolution in work and commuting patterns, high-income residents in primarily business services industries have moved from downtown to suburban neighborhoods and out of large, expensive cities (Ferreira & Wong, 2022; Ding & Hwang, 2022; Athloff, et al., 2022; Li & Su, 2022; Brueckner, et al., forthcoming; Ramani & Bloom, 2021).
To date, most of the literature on the responding change in firm locations has focused on those whose workers have made the WFH transition.
They find that these firms are also leaving downtown locations and substantially reducing the size of their commercial office space (Dalton & Groen, 2022; Rosenthal, et al., 2022; Gupta, et al., 2022).
Less well studied is the impact of WFH on the location decisions of brick-and-mortar establishments owned by retail firms.
For retail establishments, exposure to WFH adoption happens more directly through changes to the location and behavior of their customer base, rather than through their workforce (which remains largely in-person).
For instance, a substantial share of consumer shopping trips begin or end at home locations, leading many firms to locate near residential areas (Relihan, 2022; Farrell, et al., 2017).
This may drive retail firms to similarly shift to where consumers have moved residency.
In addition, consumers tend to chain visits to retail stores with their commutes (Miyauchi, et al., 2022).
With fewer consumers commuting each day and commuting from different locations, traditional employment centers may be unable to support the same level of retail establishments.
Furthermore, this retail activity may not simply move to residential locations if consumers who work from home make fewer and different trips—for instance, people who work at home can prepare their own lunches instead of visiting a local restaurant.
2
This report provides the first detailed evidence on the changing locations of retail establishments due to the widespread adoption of WFH technologies.
To do so, we build a novel dataset to track the entry and exit of retail establishments through Q4 2021 based on the credit and debit card activity at card terminals located in each establishment.
With this dataset, we show that there is wide variation in the extent of the retail establishment recovery across space.
We find that retail establishments have paralleled the exodus of populations from large, expensive cities in preference for smaller, Sun Belt cities and from city centers to suburbs.
These effects counterbalance, such that the aggregate number of establishments is almost equal to its pre-pandemic baseline.
In addition, we show that neighborhood exposure to the WFH shock is a key driver of the changing composition of retail establishments in downtown versus suburban areas, even controlling for neighborhood changes in population.
This is likely due to the different shopping behaviors of those who work from home, such as reduced demand for clothing and personal care services.
Understanding the scale and nature of the effects of population growth and WFH on retail locations is important because these establishments account for a large portion of commercial space and economic activity.
Prior to the pandemic, retail goods and services accounted for 29 percent of principal commercial building activities, compared to 16 percent for office.3
If establishments are changing in composition and location, then this will have important spillover effects to other sectors of the economy, including labor and housing markets.
These effects also have implications for the production and consumption value of cities and the policy interventions, such as changes in land use regulations and tax codes, that may be necessary to support continued urban economic health.
Data asset
We use transaction data from over 70 million Chase customers to identify brick-and-mortar establishments from Q1 2017 to Q2 2022.
Our definition of an establishment is the unique combination of a merchant identifier (e.g. “Bob’s Restaurant #1234”), ZIP Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA), and product corresponding to a point of sale where in-person transactions take place.
To ensure sufficient card activity to pinpoint the entry and exit of establishments, we limit our study of establishments to 16 major cities in which JPMorgan Chase has a significant customer base and make observations at a quarterly frequency.4 Our definition of a city is a Core-Based Statistical Area, which includes both the primary city and outlying suburbs.
We focus on a subset of everyday retail products that are well-captured by card transaction data.
These include groceries, general goods, clothing, restaurants, home goods, leisure, personal care services, professional consumer services, and pharmacies.
The following are non-exhaustive lists of examples for select product types: grocery stores include traditional grocers and specialty food stores.
General goods include department stores, discount stores, and other retailers that sell everyday goods (e.g., florists or booksellers).
Restaurants includes bars that sell food to be consumed on premises in addition to full-service and fast-food restaurants.
Home goods includes furniture and home improvement stores.
Personal care services includes salons, barbershops, and dry cleaners.
Leisure includes venues like movie theaters, bowling alleys, and gyms.
Professional consumer services includes veterinarians, tax preparation, and childcare.
Our establishment identification process defines activity for over 1.7 million establishments during our study period.
We consider an establishment to be active in each quarter that we observe any transaction at that establishment, while we consider establishments to exist for all quarters inclusive of their first and last active quarters.
For example, consider an establishment that is first active in Q3 2019, is active for the next two quarters before becoming inactive during a local shutdown in Q2 2020 and Q3 2020, and then is active again in Q4 2020 until Q2 2021.
We identify the entry date for this establishment as Q3 2019 and its exit date as Q2 2021.
For an external benchmark, we compare our results for establishment levels in 2019 and changes from 2018 to 2019 to the establishment survey conducted by the Census County Business Patterns and find them sufficiently consistent.
Interpretation of our establishment measure depends on several important features.
The first is that we do not cover all establishments.
Absent from this dataset are establishments with cash-only payments and those outside retail goods and services, such as in manufacturing and business services.
The second is that establishments are distinct from firms.
This can lead to a different pattern in entry and exits when the focus is establishments versus firms.
For instance, a firm may close an establishment but still exist.
A firm can also open and close establishments at the same time across a city leading us to measure entry and exits across space without any change in the number of firms.
We combine these data with information on consumer locations from the residential addresses reported by customers with at least 10 transactions in each reference month, changes in neighborhood spending offline and online derived from Chase card data, pre-pandemic neighborhood demographic data from the 2015-2019 American Community Survey (ACS), and residential and employment workforce data from the 2019 Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics Origin-Destination Employment Statistics (LODES).
Data is merged by the ZCTA geography.
Throughout the analysis we refer to ZCTAs as neighborhoods for ease of exposition.
Whether you’re a business owner or you manage a venue, it is important to keep your staff, customers and community safe from the risks of COVID-19.
The information on this page will help your business operate in a COVID-safe way and provide you with resources to support your business and staff.
Keep up to date with latest health advice from the Department of Health.
Overview
These WHO interim recommendations for use of the Valneva VLA2001 vaccine were developed on the basis of advice issued by the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) on its 11 August 2022 extraordinary meeting and the evidence summary included in the background document and annexes referenced below.
For translations of this document in other languages, click here (forthcoming).
U.S. Army Spc. Eyza Carrasco, left, with 2nd Cavalry Regiment, administers a COVID-19 vaccination at the 7th Army Training Command's (7ATC) Rose Barracks, Vilseck, Germany, May 3, 2021.
The U.S. Army Health Clinics at Grafenwoehr and Vilseck conducted a "One Community" COVID-19 vaccine drive May 3-7 to provide thousands of appointments to the 7ATC community of Soldiers, spouses, Department of the Army civilians, veterans and local nationals employed by the U.S. Army.
(Photo Credit: U.S. Army photo by Markus Rauchenberger) VIEW ORIGINAL
WASHINGTON — A new COVID-19 vaccine will be available to Soldiers as an alternative to the Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna and Johnson & Johnson’s Janssen vaccines, the Army recently announced.
“With the availability of the NOVAVAX vaccine, we are pleased to have another tool to help combat the spread of COVID-19,” said Lt. Gen. R. Scott Dingle, Army Surgeon General and commanding general of U.S. Army Medical Command.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration issued an emergency use authorization July 13, 2022 for the Novavax COVID-19 Vaccine, for the prevention of COVID-19 caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in individuals 18 years of age and older.
“The Novavax vaccine is something called a ‘recombinant protein vaccine.’
These types of vaccines have been used since the 1980s.
Other recombinant protein vaccines include the vaccines for shingles, hepatitis B, and human papillomavirus,” Dingle said.
Novavax provides an option for Soldiers who are not fully vaccinated and uses a different technology from the mRNA and viral vector vaccine options.
Dr. Steven Cersovsky, Deputy Director of the Army Public Health Center, said Novavax performs like a traditional vaccine.
“In a more ‘traditional’ vaccine, like Novavax, the injection gives your body a part of the virus: in this case, it’s giving you one protein, the spike protein,” Cersovsky said.
“And it allows your body to generate an immune response to that protein.”
Novavax, a two-dose vaccine that does not have a recommended booster, has been widely used in Europe since early 2022 and has been shown to be as effective as other vaccines at preventing severe disease, hospitalization and deaths from the coronavirus infection, Cersovsky said.
Soldiers who voluntarily choose to get Novavax will be considered in compliance with the DOD COVID-19 vaccine mandate.
“This vaccine, as one component of all recommended vaccines, supports the Army’s goals of sustaining a proficient and ready medical force and healthy Soldiers for Life, Army civilians, and families,” Dingle said.
“Soldiers have the option and can consult [with] their healthcare providers on the medical aspects, and they have the option to consult [with] their chaplains on the religious aspect,” said Lt. Col. William Martin, chaplain and religious accommodations and moral ethics officer at the Army’s Office of the Chief of Chaplains.
“This is a religious matter affecting a medical reality; it’s really a team advisement here in order to give that Soldier the best information so that, in accordance with their sincerely held religious beliefs, they can make the best decision.”
Commanders and medical professionals are being provided with information regarding Novavax; if Soldiers are interested in more information to see if Novavax is right for them, they can contact their commanders, chaplains or medical professionals.
“Our number-one priority is protecting the health and welfare of our greatest assets – our Soldiers, our family members and Army civilians,” Dingle said.
“We will continue to ensure that our personnel have the most accurate information on protective measures they can take to reduce the spread of COVID-19.”
DOWNLOAD [PDF]: COVID-19 Vaccination Options
This section presents the analysis results of the closed restaurants (i.e., casual restaurants and cafes) clusters in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
First, the study provides a general perspective on the spatio-temporal distribution of the number of closed restaurants using a histogram and KDE.
Next, this study examines changes in the densities of closed restaurants after the pandemic outbreak using RRS.
Second, this study estimates RRS clusters obtained from various pairs of case and control densities.
Specifically, it examines the varying impacts on different types of restaurant businesses by comparing the densities of closed casual restaurants and cafes.
Furthermore, changes in the densities of closed businesses before and after the outbreak are explored by comparing the densities of closed businesses before and after the outbreak.
Finally, this study estimates declined commercial areas after the pandemic outbreak using RRS and STRRS by comparing the densities of closed restaurants to those opened restaurants.
(1) The spatio-temporal distributions in closed restaurants
Figure 1 shows the temporal changes in the number of closed restaurants at monthly intervals.
A total of 67,717 restaurants had closed during the 4-year period from 1 January 2018 to 31 December 2022.
The numbers of closed restaurants are 33,796 and 33,921 before and after the COVID-19 outbreak, respectively, and they show temporal variations (Fig. 1).
Similar to these temporal variations, spatial variations in the distribution of closed restaurants might also exist.
Figure 1
A time series histogram for the number of closed restaurants with 1 month interval.
Full size image
Figure 2 presents the spatial clusters of closed restaurants resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
The clusters of interest in this study are sequentially numbered from C-I to C-VII for reference purposes.
Figure 2A, B display KDE results of closed restaurants during the periods of 2018–2019 and 2020–2021, respectively.
The bandwidths for the KDEs are estimated to 1050 m based on the plug-in methods, but they are adjusted to 1000 m to enhance intuitive understanding and ease of analysis.
The KDE results reveal three major clusters (i.e., C-I, C-II, and C-III) in central business and major commercial districts in Seoul, as well as four minor clusters (i.e., from C-IV to C-VII) in local commercial districts.
Figure 2 The KDE results of closed restaurants (A) before and (B) after the pandemic and (C) the RRS results by comparing them.
Full size image
The KDE results (Fig. 2A, B) demonstrate changes in the size and shape of the clusters following the COVID-19 outbreak.
Notably, clusters C-III, C-IV, C-V, and C-VII have emerged after the outbreak, whereas the sizes of clusters C-II and C-VI have decreased.
The shape of cluster C-I has also changed slightly from an east–west orientation to a north–south orientation.
Cluster C-III, located in the central business district (CBD) and containing major tourist attractions such as Myeongdong in Seoul, has experienced a significant increase in size (Refer to the Supplementary Figure).
This may be due to the implementation of strict social distancing policies such as telecommuting and allowing restaurants and cafes to provide only delivery and takeout services, as well as travel restrictions for foreigners33.
The RRS result (Fig. 2C) highlights changes in local clusters of closed restaurant densities in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, although the global clustering test does not show a statistical difference in closed restaurant densities after the outbreak (p-value of 0.307 with 999 permutations).
The areas with line fill symbols indicate statistically significant local clusters of changes in closed restaurant densities based on the permutation test.
Positive RRS values in C-III, C-IV, C-V, and C-VII with line fill symbols indicate significant increases in closed restaurant densities after the COVID-19 outbreak.
This highlights the increase in C-III (i.e., the CBD) due to social distancing policies.
Negative RRS values in C-I, C-II, and C-VI indicate that the densities of closed restaurants have decreased, although they still show relatively high densities of closed restaurants after the outbreak.
The significant area in C-I successfully captures the changes in its shapes of C-I (Fig. 2A, B).
(2) Comparing closed restaurant densities before and after the pandemic outbreak
The COVID-19 pandemic has had varying impacts on different types of restaurants, specifically casual restaurants and cafes, as shown in their KDE results (Fig. 3A, B).
The bandwidth size for both KDEs is estimated to 1250 m using the plug-in method based on the pooled standard deviations of all restaurants.
These results differ slightly from those of all restaurants (Fig. 2), thus requiring further explanation of the clusters of closed restaurants based on their types.
The KDE values for closed casual restaurants are relatively higher in C-I, C-II, C-III, and C-V, whereas those for cafes are higher in C-I, C-II, C-III, and C-VII.
The clusters are commonly found in C-I, C-II, and C-III, which are the CBD and major commercial districts.
The café KDE result emphasizes C-VII, which consists of a newly developed café area (e.g., Munrae-Dong), while the casual restaurant KDE result highlights C-V, where business offices are concentrated (e.g., Gasan digital complex) (Refer to the Supplementary Figure).
Figure 3
The KDE results of closed (A) casual restaurants and (B) cafes with (C) the RRS results by comparing (A) and (B) as control and case, respectively.
Full size image
The impacts of the pandemic on restaurant businesses need to be analyzed by considering the different types of restaurants as the RRS result (Fig. 3C) explicitly shows the varying impacts on casual restaurants and cafes.
This analysis uses RRS to compare the KDE results of closed casual restaurants and café (Fig. 3A, B).
The global clustering of the RRS results supports their statistical difference with the p-value of 0.001.
The RRS analysis was conducted using the same bandwidth size as its corresponding KDE results.
Additionally, the RRS result shows local variations in the clusters of closed restaurants, with significantly different areas marked using line fill symbols.
Specifically, positive RRS values indicate that the densities of closed cafes are relatively higher than those of closed casual restaurants, while negative RRS values indicate that closed casual restaurants are dominant in the corresponding areas.
The results clearly show that café closings are dominant in areas C-VII, while casual restaurant closings are more prevalent in areas C-V.
The spatial distributions of closed casual restaurants and cafes after the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak exhibit distinct differences (Fig. 4), which provides additional insights into the patterns of closed restaurants.
Specifically, the RRS analyses are conducted for each restaurant type by comparing the KDE results of closed restaurants after (Fig. 3A, B) and before the pandemic outbreak.
Overall, the RRS result of closed casual restaurants (Fig. 4A) is more similar to that of all closed restaurants (Fig. 2C) because the number of closed casual restaurants is higher than that of cafes.
The RRS results of casual restaurants and all closed restaurants only differ in C-I and C-III.
Specifically, for casual restaurants, C-I exhibits positive RRS values, indicating an increase in the density of closed casual restaurants after the outbreak.
In C-III, the cluster sizes of the positive RRS values are larger for casual restaurants than for all closed restaurants.
These differences lead to a significant result in the global clustering test, with a p-value of 0.018, indicating a statistically significant difference in closed casual restaurants after the outbreak, while no significant difference was observed in the analysis of all closed restaurants.
Figure 4 The RRS results by comparing the densities of closed (A) casual restaurants and (B) cafes before and after the pandemic outbreak.
Full size image
The RRS results for closed cafes represent distinct spatial patterns compared to those of closed casual restaurants.
While the RRS values for closed cafes in C-IV, C-V, and C-VII show relatively similar patterns to those for closed casual restaurants, the RRS values for C-I, C-II, C-III, and C-VI indicate opposite trends between closed cafes and casual restaurants.
Specifically, the densities of closed cafes are higher in C-I and C-III (Fig. 3B), but they have decreased after the pandemic outbreak.
However, the densities of closed cafes are higher in C-II, where the RRS result shows an increase in densities after the outbreak.
Moreover, the RRS result indicates significant changes in the closing patterns of cafes based on the significant global clustering test with a p-value of 0.002.
(3) Comparing the densities of closed and opened restaurants after the pandemic outbreak
The impacts of the COVID-19 outbreak on the districts of casual restaurants and cafes are examined using RRS by comparing the densities of opened and closed restaurants (Fig. 5).
A district with significantly higher densities of closed restaurants than opened restaurants could indicate a decline in restaurant businesses in the district.
However, it is important to note that high densities of closed restaurants in a district may not necessarily indicate a decline in local commercial district if the district also has high densities of opening restaurants.
Figure 5
The RRS results by comparing closed and opened (A) casual restaurants and (B) cafes.
Full size image
The RRS analysis compares the densities between closed and opened casual restaurants to assess the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on local casual restaurant businesses.
Although the total number of opened casual restaurants (26,126) in Seoul is greater than that of closed casual restaurants (23,941) during the pandemic period (2020–2021), the RRS result indicate statistically significant local variations in the impacts of the pandemic on casual restaurants (p-value = 0.005 in the global clustering test).
For instance, C-I and C-IV in Fig.
4A show similar trends with both exhibiting increases in the densities of closed casual restaurants after the outbreak.
However, their RRS values in Fig.
5A show opposite trends with C-I showing a negative RRS value (i.e., higher densities in opened casual restaurants) and C-IV showing a positive RRS value (i.e., higher densities in closed casual restaurants).
This indicates that the casual restaurant business in C-IV has declined, while that in C-I has been maintained or even improved after the outbreak.
Similar patterns are observed in C-III and C-VI, which exhibit trends similar to those of C-IV and C-I, respectively.
The RRS analysis also examines the impacts of the pandemic on cafes by comparing the densities of closed cafes to those of opened cafes (Fig. 5B).
Similar to casual restaurant business, the total number of opened cafes (11,985) is slightly higher than that of closed cafes (9980).
However, the RRS result also reveals significant local variations in the impacts of the pandemic on cafes (p-value = 0.008 in the global clustering test).
For example, in Fig. 4B, C-I and C-III both show a decrease in closed café densities after the outbreak, but Fig.
5B reveals distinct patterns in the two clusters.
C-I not only exhibits a decrease in closed café densities, but also higher densities of opened cafes than closed cafes, which indicates that this district has not been negatively impacted by the pandemic.
In contrast, C-III displays a significant decline in café business with closed café densities remaining higher than those of opened cafes.
Similarly, C-VII also shows a higher density of closed cafes (although not statistically significant) than opened cafes along with an increase in densities after the outbreak, which indicates a potential decline in café business in this district.
By comparing the spatio-temporal densities of closed and opened restaurants, STRRS identifies regions and time periods of decline in restaurant businesses after the pandemic outbreak.
This study estimates the optimal sizes of spatio-temporal bandwidths for STRRS using the plug-in method and adjusted them to 2000 m and 90 days for spatial and temporal bandwidths, respectively, for ease of interpretation.
Figure 6 displays the study area (i.e., Seoul) on the x- and y-axes and the temporal dimension from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2021 on the z-axis.
The significant spatio-temporal clusters are represented in isosurfaces18, which specifically indicate significantly higher densities of closed restaurants than opened restaurants at the 1% significance level.
Figure 6
The spatio-temporal clusters obtained from STRRS results by comparing closed and opened (A) casual restaurants and (B) cafes.
Full size image
The STRRS analysis compares the spatio-temporal densities of closed and opened casual restaurants to identify spatio-temporal clusters of closed restaurants (Fig. 6A).
The corresponding RRS result (Fig. 5A) successfully captures the district that show a decline in casual business after the pandemic outbreak.
Furthermore, the STRRS result provides specific periods for these declines.
For instance, C-IV and C-V show similar RRS results (Figs. 4A and 5A), and the spatio-temporal clusters (Fig. 6A) also occur at a similar period, i.e., January 2021.
The RRS result for the southern region of C-I is also similar to that of C-IV and C-V, but its spatio-temporal cluster, i.e., a statistically higher density of closed casual restaurants than opened ones, occurs in December 2021.
Figure 6B shows spatio-temporal clusters of closed cafes using the STRRS analysis by comparing the densities of closed and opened cafes.
The isosurfaces based on the STRRS results identify five spatio-temporal clusters, including C-IV and C-VII.
Both C-IV and C-VII exhibit declines in café businesses after the pandemic outbreak with similar RRS values (Figs. 4B and 5B), but they occur during slightly different time periods.
Specifically, the spatio-temporal clusters in C-IV and C-VII are occurred in March and June 2021, respectively.
Similar to the STRRS results for the southern region of C-I in the casual restaurant counterpart, the STRRS results for the café counterpart also reveal spatio-temporal clusters in November 2021.
College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Screens Public Health Service Documentary with Producer
Jorge Mendoza, who earned his M.Ed.
in curriculum and instruction in May 2022, works as an instructional designer at San Jacinto College.
Posted Oct. 4, 2022 — Completing a graduate degree can be difficult for anyone, but the pandemic has posed additional obstacles.
Jorge Mendoza, who caught COVID-19 in late July 2021 as he was working on his master’s degree at the University of Houston College of Education, knows the struggle.
“It’s a blessing that I’m here, because it was bad,” he said.
“If I took three or four steps, I would be hyperventilating,”
Mendoza persevered with the support of his professors, ultimately earning his M.Ed.
in curriculum and instruction in May 2022 and recently starting his dream job as an instructional designer at San Jacinto College.
None of that seemed possible during the weeks he battled COVID.
At the time, Mendoza taught a second-grade bilingual class at Patterson Elementary in the Conroe Independent School District.
Worried about missing the chance to connect with his students at the start of the semester and too ill to complete his capstone project, he considered dropping out of the master’s program.
But faculty exercised flexibility amid the pandemic, and Mendoza received extensions to finish his assignments.
“In spite of hardships, Jorge remained resilient,” Clinical Assistant Professor Bulent Dogan said.
“It was a time when he was in need of extra help from us as faculty members.
I am delighted to have been able to provide him with both academic and mentoring support.”
Mendoza’s former student drew a portrait of the two of them.
Her description (edited for clarity) reads in part, “Mr. Mendoza is so good with the kids and with the leaders and heroes.
He always does good things for us.”
Mendoza earned his master’s degree more than a decade after graduating from UH with a bachelor’s degree in interdisciplinary studies in 2011.
His undergraduate years were affected by illness, too, when his mother died from stomach cancer.
“Seeing your mom in pain?
It’s no good,” he said.
Unable to cover tuition, Mendoza had to drop out of college.
Homeless until relatives assisted, Mendoza worked in retail before returning to UH and getting certified as a bilingual teacher.
“I never thought I was going to be a teacher,” he said.
Growing up, he was most passionate about technology, but his mother, a lifelong educator, encouraged him after he graduated high school to consider teaching.
He came to realize the joys of watching students learn and grow.
“Teaching is a blessing,” said Mendoza, remembering a student who struggled with addition early in the year but learned multiplication and division by the end.
“It’s just the greatest reward you can get.”
For graduate school, he was able to focus on his interest in technology through the College of Education’s learning, design and technology specialization.
Now he’s on to the next phase of his career, using his master’s degree to provide instructional support to departments and faculty at San Jacinto College.
Mendoza said he drew upon his capstone project during the job interview process.
He showed off the website he developed with personalized instructional videos to help teachers engage students beyond worksheets and premade programs.
“I don’t have the words to express my full gratitude,” he said of UH, “but please know that the LDT program helped change my life.”
That, Dogan said, is the goal.
“We expose our graduates to a wide variety of tools and skills in the field of e-learning technologies, and they become fully prepared to handle the needs of corporations and educational organizations.”
— By Lillian Hoang
— Photos courtesy of Jorge Mendoza
Intermittent fasting, especially when done over the course of decades, can have positive effects on metabolic and cardiovascular health.
Now, a new study by researchers at Intermountain Health in Salt Lake City finds that it may also add an extra layer of protection from heart-related COVID-19 complications in people who had already sought cardiac care.
“We already know that regular fasting over long periods of time can lead to overall health improvements.
Here we found that it may also lead to better outcomes in COVID-19 patients who required a cardiac catheterization,” said Benjamin Horne, PhD, director of cardiovascular and genetic epidemiology at the Intermountain Health.
“Fasting won’t necessarily stop a cardiac event from happening, but it may prevent someone from developing heart failure after.”
In the study, Intermountain researchers examined patients who enrolled in the INSPIRE registry, a voluntary registry at Intermountain Health, who were also undergoing cardiac catheterization from February 2013 to March 2020.
Of that group, 464 patients had been diagnosed with COVID-19 between March 6, 2020, and April 8, 2022, of those, 135 reported that they fasted routinely — on average for 42.7 years.
Researchers found that those who practiced regular fasting had a lower rate of heart failure-related hospitalization, complications, and death than COVID-19 positive patients in the study who did not fast.
Researchers presented results of the study at the American College of Cardiology / World Heart Federation’s 2023 Scientific Session in New Orleans on March 6.
“These results show that long-term, low-frequency fasting can help prevent heart failure, even in patients who have both COVID-19 and heart problems already,” Dr. Horne said.
Intermountain Health heart and vascular clinicians have had the opportunity to closely study this specific cohort of long-time fasters because a large portion of its patients fast regularly for religious reasons.
Nearly 62 percent of Utah’s population belongs to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, whose members typically fast the first Sunday of the month by going without food or drink for two consecutive meals.
As such, Dr. Horne stressed that study participants aren’t patients who are fasting as part of a fad diet.
The shortest period of time a participant had been fasting was seven years; the longest, 82.
Dr. Horne said that more research is needed to understand why intermittent fasting is associated with better COVID-19 outcomes in patients already being treated for heart conditions, but said it’s most likely due to a host of ways that it affects the body.
For example, fasting reduces inflammation, especially since hyperinflammation is associated with poor COVID-19 outcomes.
In addition, after 12 to 14 hours of fasting, the body switches from using glucose in the blood to ketones, which can improve heart function.
Another potential benefit is that intermittent fasting promotes autophagy, which is “the body’s recycling system that helps your body destroy and recycle damaged and infected cells,” he said.
Dr. Horne stressed that anyone who wants to consider starting a new fasting practice should consult their doctors first, especially if they are elderly, pregnant, or have conditions like diabetes, heart or kidney disease.
###
In developing countries today, 71% of people have an account, up from 42% a decade ago.
(Globally, 76% of adults around the world have an account today, up from 51% a decade ago.)
These tremendous gains are also now more evenly distributed and come from a greater number of countries than ever before.
The biggest growth has been in the use of digital payments, which surged during COVID-19 mobility restrictions and when cash was perceived as unsanitary.
Two-thirds of adults worldwide now make or receive a digital payment.
In developing countries, excluding China where digital payments are widespread, some 40% of people who made a digital payment from their account (to a merchant or for a utility service) did so for the very first time since the start of the pandemic.
Digital payments are typically safer and more convenient, and can be an entry to using other financial services.
Findex data show that adults who receive a payment into an account in developing economies make use of financial services more than the average adult.
In developing economies, 36% of adults received a payment into an account, such as private or public sector wage payments, government transfer or pension payments, payments for the sale of agricultural products or domestic remittances.
Of those 36% who received a payment into an account, 83% also make a digital payment, about two thirds use the account to store money for cash management, and about 40% tell us they use their account to save or to borrow money.
“The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the fundamental role that digital infrastructure can play in rapidly delivering services and social assistance to people.
Integration of digital ID, digital payments, and trusted data sharing platforms is critical for serving the poor at scale and connecting communities to opportunities,” says Christine Zhenwei Qiang, Global Director for Digital Development Global Practice.
“This report underscores that for many developing country consumers, the gateway to innovative financial services is mobile money, supported by improvements in coverage, affordability and reliability of digital infrastructure.”
The gender gap in account ownership has also shrunk, narrowing from 9 to 6 percentage points in developing countries.
The data now find that 74% of men but only 68% of women in developing economies had an account.
Reaching the 1.4 billion people who remain unbanked
Globally, some 1.4 billion adults remain unbanked.
These people are hardest to reach – and more commonly women, poorer, less educated, and living in rural areas.
While digitalizing government and other payments is the way to go, much more is needed.
Governments, private employers and financial service providers, including fintechs, should work together to lower barriers to access and improving physical, data and financial infrastructure.
“To reach them, governments and the private sector will need to work hand-in-hand to forge the policies and practices needed to build trust in financial service providers, confidence in using financial products, new tailored product designs, as well as a strong and enforceable consumer protection framework,” says Leora Klapper, Lead Economist in Development Economics Vice Presidency and main author of the Global Findex report.
Also, despite this continued growth in account ownership, only about half of adults in developing economies report that they could reliably access extra funds within 30 days if faced with an unexpected expense, according to the Findex findings.
And about two-thirds of adults are very worried about at least one area of financial stress, whether it’s paying for medical bills, paying for school fees, paying for regular monthly bills, having enough money for old age.
“Findex is showing us that digitalization of financial services is changing the game, which is very inspiring for those financially included – and for Bank staff working on these issues,” says Jean Pesme, Global Director for Finance in the Finance, Competitiveness & Innovation (FCI) Global Practice.
“Much more is needed.
We need to focus on countries that have made least progress and redouble our efforts to reach the most vulnerable, notably women.
This is key to fostering inclusion and increasing resilience.”
Resources:
World Bank Live replay
Findex Website
Animated video
Blog: Unveiling the Global Findex database 2021 in five charts
Blog: Global Findex: Digitalization in COVID-19 Boosted Financial Inclusion
Matching Gifts
You can increase your impact by making use of your company’s matching gift program.
In these instances, you will be recognized for the full amount of your gift plus any employer match.
To find out if your company has a matching gift policy, please enter your employer's name in the search box.
Thank you for your support!
Omicron overstayed its welcome.
At-home COVID-19 testing was routine.
The bivalent booster arrived.
The past 12 months also saw the U.S. surpass more than a million total COVID deaths, vaccine authorizations for very young children, and a year-end tripledemic.
As year three of the COVID-19 era draws to a close, we asked some of the School’s pandemic experts to weigh in on the good, the bad, and the unknown of COVID-19 in 2022, and share their greatest hope—COVID-wise—for 2023.
The Good
In 2022, COVID-19 illness was less severe and less deadly compared to 2020 and 2021, and no new variant has emerged with the capacity to fuel a major wave of cases.
Contributing factors to these positive developments:
Unprecedented advances in vaccine technology that allow for rapid updates to protect against new strains.
A more effective treatment and prevention toolbox of vaccines and boosters, oral antivirals, and home test kits.
Growing population immunity to the virus.
“Mortality and illness from COVID-19 now looks a lot more like that of influenza, concentrated in older age groups and on the same order of magnitude, and there is hope that as our immune systems see this virus even more, illness will continue to get milder,” says Epidemiology professor David Dowdy, MD, PhD ’08, ScM ’02.
COVID became less of a disruption in our lives, making it possible to resume pre-pandemic activities like travel, attending large events, and going to school in person and unmasked.
“We have built enough immunity to COVID to allow life to return to normal in many ways without huge surges in the number of deaths any longer,” says Epidemiology professor Gypsyamber D’Souza, PhD ’07, MPH, MS.
Amesh Adalja, MD, senior scholar with the Center for Health Security, maintains that “people have, for the most part, learned to risk calculate and navigate a world with an unavoidable new virus.”
This year has also demonstrated that COVID has permanently altered how and where we work.
“There have been societal changes in work-from-home and hybrid-work availability that are positive for many individuals,” says D’Souza.
The Bad
In January and February, the U.S. was in the midst of the initial omicron wave.
(The variant emerged in late 2021.)
“At its peak, the wave involved the highest weekly number of [COVID-19] cases and nearly the highest weekly number of deaths of the entire pandemic,” says Dowdy.
“Neither vaccination nor having had COVID reduced chances of reinfection as much as we would like, and we will continue to see high transmission this winter,” says D’Souza.
“Although risk of severe illness is much lower, many people have symptoms that keep them in bed for days feeling quite unwell.”
Also in the negative column: continued COVID misinformation, particularly around vaccines, with “follow-on consequences for regular childhood vaccinations,” says Tara Kirk Sell, PhD, MA, senior scholar with the Center for Health Security; underutilization of the antiviral medication Paxlovid; clear evidence of pandemic fallout in other aspects of our lives and in society as a whole, including increased rates of mental illness especially among adolescents, “higher levels of opioid overdose, [and] educational shortfalls,” Dowdy says.
The Unknown
Experts agree that China’s relaxing of two years of zero-COVID policies tops their list of unknowns.
Outbreaks are occurring across the country, and hospitals report being overwhelmed as COVID and flu collide.
Says Dowdy: “More than one-sixth of the world’s population lives in China.
… We could see a huge wave of COVID-19 in the next few months, as levels of immunity there are much lower.”
Some other key questions and concerns:
“Will public health departments be able to maintain the badly needed skills and expertise they were able to gain during the pandemic?”
Sell asks.
“Almost every public health department leader I’ve spoken to in the past few weeks is stressing about being able to keep staff.”
D’Souza notes: “It’s unclear how well the new bivalent boosters protect against current strains—and since many people have had COVID this summer or fall, it’s unclear whether they would benefit from boosting.
How long to wait after having had COVID before getting the booster is not well understood.”
Another unknown, says Amesh Adalja, is “how COVID impacts the circulation of other respiratory viruses and overall mortality from pneumonia and influenza, over the long term.”
Hopes for 2023
Tara Kirk Sell: “I hope that COVID-19 will be relegated to a normal public health concern—something like how we work to protect people from flu, car accidents, suicides, heart disease.
It probably won’t ever disappear, but it can be something we can manage going forward.”
Amesh Adalja: “Universal vaccines, better antivirals, new monoclonal antibodies, handling COVID like other respiratory viruses.”
Gypsyamber D’Souza: “My hope is that most people feel their lives are back to normal and that there is less stress and concern about whether to be able to travel, see family and friends, and attend large gatherings.”
David Dowdy: “My hope is that 2023 will be the year where we truly feel like our lives are getting back to normal.
Life will never be completely the same, and we will be dealing with the aftermath of the pandemic for many years to come.
But I hope that by the end of 2023, COVID-19 and its after-effects won’t even crack most people’s ‘top 10 problems in my life right now.’
That would be a huge public health success.”
Jackie Powder is the assistant editor of Hopkins Bloomberg Public Health magazine.
RELATED:
To receive continuing education (CE) for WD4520-022323 – Clinician Outreach and Communication Activity (COCA) Calls/Webinars – Evaluating and Supporting Children and Adolescents Presenting with Post–COVID Conditions, please visit CDC TRAIN and search for the course in the Course Catalog using WD4520-022323.
Follow the steps below by March 28, 2025.
Register for and complete the course.
Pass the post-assessment at 75%.
Complete the evaluation.
Visit Your Learning to access your certificates and transcript.
In support of improving patient care, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is jointly accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education (ACCME), the Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education (ACPE), and the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC), to provide continuing education for the healthcare team.
CME: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention designates this activity for a maximum of 1 AMA PRA Category 1 Credits™.
Physicians should claim only the credit commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity.
AAPA CME: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been authorized by the American Academy of PAs (AAPA) to award AAPA Category 1 CME credit for activities planned in accordance with AAPA CME Criteria.
This activity is designated for 1 AAPA Category 1 CME credits.
Approval is valid until 12/13/2023.
PAs should only claim credit commensurate with the extent of their participation.
CNE:
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention designates this activity for 1 nursing contact hours.
CPE: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention designated this (Knowledge-based) event for pharmacists to receive 0.1 CEUs in pharmacy education.
The Universal Activity Number is JA4008229-0000-23-004-L04-P and enduring is JA4008229-0000-23-005-H04-P.
Once credit is claimed, an unofficial statement of credit is immediately available on CDC TRAIN.
Official credit will be uploaded within 60 days on the NABP/CPE Monitor.
CEU: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is authorized by IACET to offer 0.1 CEU’s for this program.
CECH: Sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, a designated provider of continuing education contact hours (CECH) in health education by the National Commission for Health Education Credentialing, Inc.
This program is designated for Certified Health Education Specialists (CHES®) and/or
Master Certified Health Education Specialists (MCHES®) to receive up to 1.0 total Category
I continuing education contact hours.
Maximum advanced level continuing education contact hours available are 1.
Continuing Competency credits available are 1.
CDC provider number 98614.
AAVSB/RACE:
This program was reviewed and approved by the AAVSB RACE program for 1.0 hours of continuing education.
Participants should be aware that some boards have limitations on the number of hours accepted in certain categories and/or restrictions on certain methods of delivery of continuing education.
Please contact the AAVSB RACE program at race@aavsb.org if you have any comments/concerns regarding this program’s validity or relevancy to the veterinary profession.
For Certified Public Health Professionals (CPH): The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is a pre-approved provider of Certified in Public Health (CPH) recertification credits and is authorized to offer 1 CPH recertification credits for this program.
DISCLOSURE:
In compliance with continuing education requirements, all planners and presenters must disclose all financial relationships, in any amount, with ineligible companies over the previous 24 months as well as any use of unlabeled product(s) or products under investigational use.
CDC, our planners, and presenters wish to disclose they have no financial relationship(s) with ineligible companies whose primary business is producing, marketing, selling, re-selling, or distributing healthcare products used by or on patients.
Content will not include any discussion of the unlabeled use of a product or a product under investigational use with the exception of Dr. Laura Malone and Dr. Amanda Morrow’s discussion of off label use of medications for managing POTS and chronic headaches, since there are no FDA approved medications for POTS management; they will discuss first line options including beta blockers, fludrocortisone, and midodrine, topiramate, amitriptyline, and cyproheptadine which are approved for other indications.
CDC did not accept financial or in-kind support from ineligible companies for this continuing education activity.
Fees:
No fees are charged for CDC’s CE activities.
So, you got a positive result on your home test for Covid-19.
What do you do next?
In addition to everything else on your plate — isolating and notifying close contacts, taking time off work and rescheduling appointments — it’s good practice to report your test results.
And while home tests have made it easier and faster to screen yourself and get treatment, it is not always easy to report an illness.
This confusion has meant that many cases are left out of official counts.
If you test positive at a clinic or another community testing site, those results must be reported to public health departments under the CARES Act.
Some home tests taken under the supervision of a trained telehealth provider are also reported to government health officials.
But if your rapid test doesn’t fall into one of these categories, it can be unclear what to do.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention “strongly encourages” everyone who self-tests to report their positive results to a health care provider, who may order a P.C.R. test or otherwise report the data to state authorities.
But only a few state health departments, including those in Colorado and Washington, collect data from home tests.
Others, like in Massachusetts and New York, allow individual county health departments to decide whether they want to collect home test results.
It took a long time for Rachel Bean to fully accept that she has Long COVID.
Bean, 35, caught the virus in May 2020, when most experts were still saying that COVID-19 either causes life-threatening illness or milder symptoms that resolve within a few weeks.
Bean’s acute case was asymptomatic—so as time passed and she felt unwell, with a rapid heart rate and unrelenting fatigue, she figured there had to be another explanation.
Then, in August 2020, she joined an online Long COVID support group and found that plenty of other people hadn’t fully recovered from COVID-19, either.
But many of their symptoms seemed different than hers, so she kept pushing through.
Finally, in late 2020—shortly before her illness forced her to leave her job as a social worker—Bean asked her doctor to refer her to a Long COVID treatment clinic.
Today, Bean is struck by how many people still don’t realize that their health issues could be signs of Long COVID.
She’s talked to people who insist they’ve fully recovered from COVID-19, but also complain of classic Long COVID symptoms like fatigue and cognitive dysfunction.
“People aren’t necessarily connecting the dots,” Bean says.
Experts say that lack of recognition could be causing some Long COVID cases to go undiagnosed.
“People are bad at correlation if they’re not thinking about it all the time,” says Hannah Davis, a machine learning expert who is part of the Long COVID Patient-Led Research Collaborative.
“When you had COVID…and then two months later you stop being able to drive, you’re not necessarily going to tie it to that.”
Not every health issue is a sign of Long COVID.
Thousands of people around the world are diagnosed with COVID-19 every day, and many recover without lingering issues.
Others experience health problems following but unrelated to their infections, because all the things that made people sick before the pandemic haven’t gone away.
But Long COVID affects more people than many realize.
In the U.S. alone, roughly one in five adults with a known previous case of COVID-19 currently has Long COVID symptoms, according to recent data from the National Center for Health Statistics.
Others could be living with the condition without realizing it.
Testing for COVID-19 is now as easy as swabbing your nose at home.
Diagnosing Long COVID is more complicated, as no single test can detect it.
Public-health groups define the condition slightly differently, but their criteria usually boil down to having symptoms that didn’t exist prior to a confirmed or suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection, last at least a couple months after infection, and can’t be explained by anything else.
In the summer of 2020, an estimated half of cases weren’t formally diagnosed, according to an article co-authored by U.K. researcher Trish Greenhalgh.
It’s hard to say exactly what that percentage is today, but it’s probably still significant.
There are an estimated 2 million people with Long COVID in the U.K., which by Greenhalgh’s estimate means each full-time general practitioner there cares for about 65 long-haulers.
But fewer are properly diagnosed, due to factors like patients not seeking care, doctors missing the condition, or doctors entering it into patient records as something else, she explains.
Elisa Perego, an honorary research fellow in archaeology at University College London who is credited with coining the term “Long Covid” to describe her own condition, says there’s another problem: many people genuinely have no idea they might have Long COVID.
Policymakers, public-health officials, and the media “have often portrayed covid as a short, flu-like disease, especially in the young,” Perego wrote in an email.
As a result, people might not make the connection between a case of COVID-19 and health issues months later, especially if they had a mild initial illness or are fully vaccinated; other people may have been asymptomatically infected or got a false-negative test result, so they don’t know they had COVID-19 at all.
Long COVID also isn’t always a linear condition.
Some people catch COVID-19 and never fully recover, while others seem to get better and then relapse—sometimes multiple times.
There’s also a common misconception that Long COVID symptoms are a continuation of the issues people experience right after getting sick, like coughing or fever.
That’s the case for some people, but many others develop new symptoms, including fatigue, chronic pain, and neurological or cognitive issues.
“It is commonly more than one symptom and commonly more than one system in the body,” says Nisreen Alwan, an associate professor in public health at the U.K.’s University of Southampton who has had Long COVID herself.
These symptoms are also often oversimplified.
Labels like “fatigue” or “brain fog” don’t always capture the more distinctive experiences of long-haulers—like crashing after physical activity (known as post-exertional malaise) or experiencing cognitive dysfunction such as memory loss.
Plus, media coverage doesn’t always reflect the range of severity associated with Long COVID, focusing on only the most dire cases.
If people don’t see their experiences reflected in news articles or lists of symptoms, they might assume something else is going on, Alwan says.
Research shows that more people are found to have post-COVID fatigue and cognitive impairment when studies screen for these symptoms using objective, as opposed to subjective or self-reported, measures.
That finding suggests some people either miss or minimize their own symptoms, Davis says.
People of color seem most likely to be missed, says Dr. Zeina Chemali, director of neuropsychiatry clinics at Massachusetts General Hospital and co-author of a recent study on Long COVID symptoms.
Three-quarters of the people in her study were white, educated women, which “speaks volumes about the disparities in care and access,” she says.
While some people don’t realize they could have Long COVID, others refuse to accept it—and ableism plays a part in that, Perego says.
“Discrimination of disabled people in society and the fear of being permanently ill may render it more difficult to accept prolonged disease and the risk of never recovering,” she wrote.
Almost all long-haulers experience stigma at some point, according to a study Alwan co-authored that has yet to be peer-reviewed.
That could mean stigma from others—like loved ones being uncomfortable with or not believing a Long COVID diagnosis—or internalized stigma, like being embarrassed about one’s illness or physical limitations.
The medical establishment often doesn’t make matters easier, as some patients still face disbelief or a lack of knowledge from their doctors.
“This is an area where you really have to be on top of research,” Davis says.
“Your average clinician just doesn’t seem to be doing that,” which leads to cases being missed, dismissed, or misunderstood.
Even people who are correctly diagnosed with Long COVID don’t have great treatment options; there is no known cure for the condition, though some of its associated symptoms can be managed.
But Alwan says getting a diagnosis is important for other reasons.
It could make people eligible for disability benefits and sick pay, and a diagnosis might prompt a patient’s physicians to do more thorough physical exams that could uncover treatable issues.
Better recognition, diagnosis, and public education about Long COVID could help people who might currently be suffering in silence.
“The fear is that you might be missing those most in need of support,” Alwan says.
“It might be that people recognizing they’ve got Long COVID are not the only people who really need access to care.”
When Dr. Debra Langlois learned in February that federal regulators had delayed the review of Pfizer-BioNTech’s coronavirus vaccine for children under 5, her reaction was just as visceral as any parent’s.
“I was like, ‘Are you kidding me?’
Every day my daughter can’t be vaccinated, she’s at risk.”
Now, Moderna has announced that it has submitted a request for emergency use authorization of its coronavirus vaccine for children 6 months through 5 years old.
But it remains unclear when federal health officials may give a pediatric vaccine the green light.
In an interview with CNN+ last Thursday, Dr. Anthony Fauci indicated that the Food and Drug Administration may wait to authorize vaccines for young children until data from both Pfizer and Moderna is available for review, which may not happen until June.
Keeping young children safe has been an exhausting exercise for parents throughout the coronavirus pandemic.
And many parents are eager to get their littlest ones vaccinated, said Dr. Langlois, who is a pediatrician at the University of Michigan Health C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital and who has two young children, one of whom is under 5.
As pandemic precautions like mask mandates are dropped and social distancing is abandoned in favor of the return to normalcy, the F.D.A.’s delay in authorizing shots for infants and toddlers, has only added to parents’ mental fatigue.
Here’s how to make sense of what happened and what it may mean for your family.
July 22, 2022
Contact: Brian Consiglio, 573-882-9144, consigliob@missouri.edu
While African Americans have disproportionately higher COVID-19 infection and mortality rates compared to white individuals, they also have disproportionately lower COVID-19 vaccination rates, which is partially fueled by vaccine hesitancy.
In an effort to address health disparities that negatively impact African Americans, MU’s Wilson Majee led a study to better understand the factors that contribute to COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy among African Americans.
He found compounding factors, including historical mistrust in government and personal experiences of racism within the health care system, contribute to COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy for African Americans.
Majee interviewed church leaders, lifestyle coaches and participants of Live
Well by Faith, a community faith-based wellness program run by the Boone County Health Department that promotes healthy living and addresses chronic health conditions in predominantly African American communities in Boone County, Missouri.
Both historical mistrust in government and personal experiences of racism within the health care system were common themes among African American community members for not wanting to receive the COVID-19 vaccine.
“The Tuskegee Syphilis Study was repeatedly mentioned as a popular example of unethical medical treatment toward African Americans by the federal government, and once that trust is lost, it can be hard to regain even as time goes on,” said Majee, an associate professor in the MU School of Health Professions.
“One respondent mentioned the common reminder from the federal government of never forgetting the tragic events of September 11, 2001, yet African Americans are expected to forget the unethical research practices and the history of injustice and racism from their own federal government.”
Majee also told the story of another respondent who reflected on his own personal experience in the health care industry after he tested positive for COVID-19.
“This elderly man went to the hospital but was sent home, and after his health declined, he went back to the hospital but was sent back home again,” Majee said.
“When he went back a third time, he was told they had made a mistake and he was given a hospital bed so he could be monitored, and he could not help but wonder if his experience would have been different if he was not Black?”
Other factors contributing to COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy included how fast the vaccine was developed, a lack of Black physicians providing the vaccines and misinformation spread on social media.
Majee added social determinants of health, including that African Americans tend to be poorer and have less access to education, health care and healthy foods, as well as structural determinants of health, including that African Americans tend to be affected by racism in the housing, education, employment and health care industries, all compound together to contribute to worse health outcomes for African Americans.
“African Americans are more likely to have lower-income, in-person jobs at crowded places that cannot accommodate work-from-home or social distancing, so they are more likely to be exposed to and infected by COVID-19,” Majee said.
“Combine that with African Americans already being poorer and less likely to be able to afford quality health insurance, the historical mistrust in government and personal negative experiences with the health care industry, and you quickly see how all these factors start to work together to negatively impact health outcomes for African Americans.”
Community wellness programs like Live Well by Faith play a key role in helping to address these inequities, Majee said.
Receiving accurate information about the COVID-19 vaccine from trusted community members, such as African American church leaders and lifestyle coaches, played a big role in promoting positive health outcomes.
“African American members of the congregation at Black churches believed in the information they were receiving because it was coming from people they trusted that looked like themselves,” Majee said.
“The key about the Live
Well by Faith program is that it is rooted in the community, and we saw it was helpful in getting more African Americans to receive the COVID-19 vaccine.”
Majee’s main research goal is to find ways in which those with power, including local, state and federal governments, church leaders, researchers and adult role models, can distribute resources that engage vulnerable populations in their communities.
“My passion is to empower people in resource-limited communities by listening to their ideas and allocating resources to develop interventions that meet the needs of struggling people,” Majee said.
“There is a great need to elevate the health of minorities, as the disparities are huge and will continue to grow if we fail to act now.”
“The past is so present: Understanding COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy among African American adults using qualitative data” was published in Journal of Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities.
Co-authors on the study include MU’s Adaobi Anakwe, Kelechi Onyeaka and Idethia Harvey.
Travelers began streaming into mainland China by air, land and sea on Sunday, many eager for long-awaited reunions, as Beijing opened borders that have been all but shut since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic.
After three years, mainland China opened sea and land crossings with Hong Kong and ended a requirement for incoming travelers to quarantine, dismantling a final pillar of a zero-Covid policy that had shielded China’s people from the virus but also cut them off from the rest of the world.
China’s easing over the past month of one of the world’s tightest Covid regimes followed historic protests against a policy that included frequent testing, curbs on movement and mass lockdowns that heavily damaged the second-biggest economy.
Long lines formed at Hong Kong’s international airport for flights to mainland cities including Beijing, Tianjin and Xiamen and some Hong Kong media outlets estimated that thousands of people were travelling across.
“I’m so happy, so happy, so excited.
I haven’t seen my parents for many years,” said Hong Kong resident Teresa Chow as she and dozens of other travelers prepared to cross into mainland China from Hong Kong’s
Lok Ma
Chau checkpoint early on Sunday.
“My parents are not in good health, and I couldn’t go back to see them even when they had colon cancer, so I’m really happy to go back and see them now,” she said, adding that she plans to head to her hometown in eastern China’s Ningbo city.
Investors hope the reopening will eventually reinvigorate a $17-trillion economy suffering its lowest growth in nearly half a century.
But the abrupt policy reversal has triggered a massive wave of infections that is overwhelming some hospitals and causing business disruptions.
The border opening follows Saturday’s start of “chun yun”, the first 40-day period of Lunar New Year travel, which before the pandemic was the world’s largest annual migration of people returning to their hometowns of taking holidays with family.
Some 2 billion people are expected to travel this season, nearly double last year’s movement and recovering to 70% of 2019 levels, the government says.
Many Chinese are also expected to start travelling abroad, a long-awaited shift for tourist spots in countries such as Thailand and Indonesia, though several governments — worried about China’s Covid spike — are imposing curbs on travelers from the country.
Travel will not quickly return to pre-pandemic levels due to such factors as a dearth of international flights, analysts say.
China on Sunday also resumed issuing passports and travel visas for mainland residents, and ordinary visas and residence permits for foreigners.
Beijing has quotas on the number of people who can travel between Hong Kong and China each day.
At the Beijing Capital International Airport, families and friends exchanged emotional hugs and greetings with passengers arriving from Hong Kong, Warsaw and Frankfurt at the airport’s terminal 3, meetings at the arrival hall that would have been impossible just a day ago due to a now cancelled requirement for travelers from abroad to quarantine.
“I’ve been looking forward to the reopening for a long time.
Finally we are reconnected with the world.
I’m thrilled, I can’t believe it’s happening,” said a business woman surnamed Shen, 55, who flew in from Hong Kong.
Other people waiting at the airport included a group of females fans carrying long lens cameras in hope of catching a glimpse of South Korean boy band Tempest, the first idol group from South Korea to enter China in the past three years.
“It’s so good to see them in person!
They are much more handsome and taller than I expected,” a 19-year-old who gave her name as Xiny told Reuters after chasing the seven-member boyband, who flew in from Seoul via the Chinese city of Dalian.
“With quarantine restrictions lifted, it’s going to be so much more convenient to fly over to see them, and for them to come to Beijing,” she said.
Such scenes of reunions, however, jarred with others of protests in some cities around China over the weekend, in a reminder of how the economy remains under strain.
On Saturday, hundreds of Tesla owners gathered at the automaker’s showrooms and distribution centres in China to protest against its decision to slash prices for the second time in three months, a move it made to spur sales at a time of faltering demand in the world’s largest auto market.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a detrimental impact globally, pushing millions of people into poverty and economies into recession.
Although the East Asia Pacific (EAP) region was the first to be affected, it was also one of the regions that responded quickly.
The response strategies have ranged from border closings, lockdowns, and enforcement of COVID-appropriate behavior to testing, tracing, treatment, isolation, and quarantine.
Several EAP countries have received World Bank Group (WBG) financing and policy advice to help them respond to the pandemic and other human development challenges arising from it.
Many relevant experiences and lessons on COVID-19 preparedness and response have emerged that can be shared not only within EAP but also in other countries.
Hence, the main objective of the World Bank Group-Republic of Korea partnership on pandemic preparedness and response is to promote the generation of knowledge and adaptation of international best practices in preparing for and responding to subsequent phases of COVID-19 and any future pandemics.
This partnership supports countries in developing informed approaches to addressing the COVID-19 pandemic as well as preparing and responding to future threats learning from the experience of East Asian countries.
This partnership focuses on the following aspects:
(i) Developing a comprehensive understanding of successful responses to COVID-19, including with regards to governance and institutions, process and procedures, key policies and legal and regulatory framework, and health systems capacity to prevent, detect and respond;
(ii) Drawing lessons on what has and has not worked and why, and highlighting challenges that remain ahead; and
(iii) Sharing the lessons with countries struggling with the COVID-19 pandemic to empower them to adapt best practices to their own context and capacity as they respond to the pandemic.
The experiences of Korea and other East Asian countries will be reviewed and compared to inform the analysis and drive the knowledge agenda.
Moving forward, the partnership will deliver on three interrelated components related to knowledge generation, knowledge exchange, and building a sustainable platform for collaboration between countries.
This work includes:
The World Bank Group Korea office and the Health, Nutrition & Population Global Practice is co-leading this partnership through funding provided by the Ministry of Economy and Finance of the Republic of Korea.
Click here to download a full version of the background note.
In June, President Xi Jinping defended China’s “zero-Covid” strategy as “correct and effective.”
To do nothing — or “lying flat,” as Xi called it — would have meant devastation.
Now, protests are challenging China’s strict Covid lockdown policies, and through that, the story the Chinese government told about its correct and effective control of the pandemic.
That narrative goes to the core of the image China is trying to sell at home, and to some degree, abroad: that Beijing’s success against Covid-19 also proves the legitimacy and superiority of its governing model.
Especially compared to liberal democracies, like the United States.
“There’s a very strong desire from Beijing to tell not only the Chinese people — but also to show the world — how responsible the Chinese government is to its own people, and how the Chinese government is making all the difficult decisions, carrying out all the difficult pressure, in order to protect human lives,” said Yun Sun, senior fellow and director of the China program at the Stimson Center.
The Chinese government thought it had a compelling case, at least in the earlier stages of the pandemic.
After Beijing’s early failures in identifying and containing Covid-19, Xi’s government instituted strict policies — mass testing, strict quarantines, surveillance — to try to keep Covid-19 cases at or near zero.
That meant far fewer cases, and far fewer hospitalizations and deaths.
Compare that to the United States, which struggled to contain Covid-19 and was riven by political divides, which together led to a chaotic patchwork of policies alongside hundreds of thousands of deaths.
As the United States and many other countries dealt with waves of restrictions and reopenings and resurgences, China began to go back to something almost like normal in early 2021.
Although there is very much reason to doubt China’s official Covid-19 statistics, the country has recorded about 30,000 deaths compared to more than a million in the United States — but also far fewer than countries in Western Europe, or even those democracies close by, like Japan, all of which have far smaller populations than China.
The Chinese government wanted “to make an argument that in the capitalist United States, in democracy, they let loose because the government needed to force you back to work, and they didn’t really care about the human cost of it,” said Jacob Stokes, senior fellow with the Indo-Pacific Security Program at CNAS.
“And there is an element where they really do believe that.”
But once on the zero-Covid path, China didn’t have an easy route off.
As other countries invested in vaccination campaigns and began more fully reopening, China committed to keeping cases and deaths low well into 2021 and 2022, which meant locking down cities of millions and needing to reintroduce testing and quarantine measures that often seemed arbitrary, and were burdensome and imposed real costs.
The latest protests began after deaths from a fire in Urumqi, where residents were under lockdown, unleashed an anger over whether China’s promise — that its model protected the public — remained true.
The Chinese government sold a narrative of how it successfully defeated Covid.
Then, the narrative got away from it.
That narrative has been critical for President Xi.
It compensates for the early failures following the outbreak in Wuhan.
It justifies China’s economic slowdown.
It justifies the draconian measures, the public sacrifice, and mental and emotional toll; in the end we care about you, the Chinese public, your health and safety.
China framed its management of Covid-19 as a show of responsibility and stability and leadership in the world, and that was reflected back to the public.
A survey from early in the pandemic showed that the Chinese public saw China’s handling of Covid as an indication of its global rise, especially compared to the disarray in the United States.
But China’s triumphalism now looks like it had serious limitations — namely that China didn’t have a real exit plan from this strict containment strategy, especially as Covid-19 evolved and, with the omicron variants, became even more transmissible.
China’s vaccination campaign also faltered; its vaccines aren’t as efficacious and much of its elderly population remains unvaccinated.
The Chinese government actively promoted misinformation about the mRNA vaccines most widely used in the West, which closed off a pathway that could have helped fight the virus, and has made them even more reliant on homegrown shots.
The Chinese government “had a little bit of hubris, I think, about the extent to which that model meant that they were always going to be better at this than the rest of the world,” said Stokes.
“And because that became part of a political argument, I think that probably overwhelmed the policy process related to public health.”
The government looks likely to loosen the strictest of Covid-19 policies, easing some lockdown and testing restrictions.
But that will also likely mean an increase in cases, and depending on how much of an opening this really is, it may be a dramatic spike in a population that has a massive immunity gap compared with other countries around the world.
And if that’s the case — that zero-Covid didn’t blunt the worst of the pandemic, but instead delayed and delayed it, with the Chinese government never using the time to prepare a real transition away from it — that undermines the “correct and effective” narrative of zero-Covid.
“Given the reality that China has basically had so little devastation in terms of health effects, it would really crush the narrative.
And I think that that narrative is important,” said Jeremy Lee Wallace, a professor at Cornell University who researches China and authoritarian systems.
Yet the defiance of the protesters also shows that China’s Covid narrative has already started to erode.
But three years in, the pandemic, and the circumstances, have evolved.
China’s economy has sputtered, weakening the other bargain of China’s authoritarian system, a sacrifice of political and civil liberties for the promise of economic growth and stability.
That frustration is spilling over, especially now, with the rest of the world largely open, and China still largely closed, and closed off.
The Chinese government can try to censor that — say, trying to crop out maskless, screaming crowds at the World Cup on TV — but it is impossible to obscure completely.
“In the early months of the pandemic, the Chinese government has shown on the surface, just competence in terms of keeping the numbers down — but these efforts are clearly not costless,” said Joshua Byun, a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Pennsylvania who surveyed how Covid-19 affected foreign policy sentiments among the Chinese public in 2020.
“They put a real damper on the livelihood of ordinary people, and this is what we’re seeing being expressed against the government and on the streets in Beijing.”
The Chinese government cares most about its domestic audience.
But these protests affect their global image — and ambitions
As experts said, the domestic audience is the most important one here, but the Chinese government also sees value in getting the rest of the world to buy what it’s selling.
And in the early stages of the pandemic, it wasn’t a totally hard sell — and it may have also helped other countries defend and promote tough lockdown and travel policies.
But by using China’s Covid success as a contrast with other countries, especially liberal democracies, it was always clear that this was a top-down policy.
Though Beijing has tried to put some blame on local officials for Covid success and failures, it ultimately connected zero-Covid to its centralized system, and Xi Jinping himself — who, by the way, is now basically leader for life.
And China’s insistence on its singularity also made it vulnerable in other areas, most obviously in its rejection of Western-made vaccines that may be more effective than the current crop of Chinese-made vaccines, and whose adoption would at least help speed up vaccination efforts, especially among the most vulnerable.
And all of that may hurt some of China’s persuasive powers with the rest of the world.
Some scholars have argued that Xi wants to reshape the world around China’s leadership, to use its power to reset the global agenda so it aligns with its interests, not those of the United States.
China has used its economic influence, especially in the developing world, to try to achieve this, but it also used those pandemic contrasts with the West to promote its image as the more dependable, stable, less chaotic partner.
This is especially true in the Global South, where China has invested a lot in trying to expand its reach.
“What is the image that China is presenting to the Global South at this moment?
They often suggest that they have a better ‘democracy’ than the West, that they’ve got some special Chinese governance knowledge that they want to share with developing countries,” said Joshua Eisenman, politics professor at the Keough School of Global Affairs at the University of Notre Dame.
“I think we should ask if that effort is being gutted here, because anyone looking at China’s zero-Covid crackdowns is unlikely to say, ‘get me some of that.’”
And while it’s unclear how these protests will play out, and just how much of a challenge they will present to Xi’s regime, they are a reminder that as much as the Chinese government cracks down on and censors its population, there are limits to its reach.
“I think the protests have really made clear that China’s not a monolith — this is not everyone agrees with Xi Jinping and Xi Jinping all the way down,” Wallace said.
“There are a lot of diverse opinions inside of China, and that people have their own ideas about their prioritizations of freedom in public health and their willingness to speak.
And people are willing to do that even in this very closed state.”
As Wallace said, that has important implications for global perceptions of China, not so much as to whether the regime is weak or strong, but even in an authoritarian state, not everyone is marching in lockstep with the images — and narrative — that Chinese Communist Party has sought to create.
A recent study published in The Lancet Infectious Diseases examined the effects of prior coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) infection and vaccination on subsequent infection with the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) Omicron variant in children.
SARS-CoV-2 Omicron is a highly transmissible variant that can cause severe illness.
Prior SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 vaccination have been reported to alleviate the risks of Omicron infection and severe COVID-19 outcomes in adolescents and adults.
Nevertheless, data on vaccine effectiveness in children under 12 are scarce, while the effects of a prior infection on reinfection with SARS-CoV-2 Omicron remain poorly understood.
About the study
In the present study, researchers characterized the effects of SARS-CoV-2 vaccination and prior COVID-19 on Omicron reinfection in children under 12 in North Carolina.
Two age groups of children, 0-4 and 5-11, were defined.
The team used data from a surveillance system comprising positive test results for all COVID-19 cases and reinfections.
Vaccination data were obtained from the COVID-19 Vaccination Management System until January 6, 2023.
Data on hospitalization and death between March 11, 2020, and January 6, 2023, were collected.
Healthy children and those with underlying conditions were included.
Population-level SARS-CoV-2 variant prevalence data were accessed.
The researchers considered two outcomes – COVID-19 and a composite endpoint of hospitalization or death.
The team analyzed the effects of primary vaccination and prior infection on the outcomes.
They examined the effectiveness of the booster regimen relative to primary vaccination and compared the efficacies of monovalent and bivalent boosters.
Findings
By January 6, 2023, over 39,000 children aged 5-11 were partially vaccinated, 216,330 were fully vaccinated, and 46,895 were boosted.
Further, 11,235 children under five were partially vaccinated, 28,066 were fully vaccinated, and 11,529 were boosted.
There were about 116,108 and 42,484 infections among non-vaccinated and vaccinated children aged 5-11, respectively.
Among non-vaccinated COVID-19 cases aged 5-11, 141 hospitalizations and five deaths occurred, whereas 52 hospitalizations and one death occurred among vaccinated COVID-19 cases.
Among non-vaccinated children under five, 27,449 infections, including 161 hospitalizations and one death, were documented, while 2094 infections, six hospitalizations, and zero deaths were recorded among those vaccinated.
The effectiveness of the primary vaccination series against infection was 59.9% one month after the first dose, 33.7% after four months, and 14.9% after 10 months in children aged 5-11, with lower estimates for Hispanic and Black children than for children from other ethnic groups.
The emergence of newer Omicron variants (BQ and XBB (sub)lineages) decreased vaccine effectiveness.
Among previously infected children aged 5-11, the efficacy of the primary series against infection was 65.3%, 26.4%, and 10.6% at one, three, and six months post-first vaccination, respectively.
Among infection-naïve children, these estimates were 59.7%, 36.8%, and 28.6% at one, three, and six months post-first dose, respectively.
The effectiveness of the primary series against severe outcomes was 73.3% at one-month post-first dose and declined after that.
The effectiveness of a prior Omicron infection against Omicron reinfection was 79.9% after three months and 53.9% after six months.
The long-term efficacy of prior infection was superior in vaccinated children.
The effectiveness of a previous Delta variant infection against reinfection was similar between vaccinated and non-vaccinated children.
Prior infection was 83.8%, 76.2%, and 64.9% effective against severe outcomes after three, six, and nine months, respectively.
The effectiveness of a monovalent booster against infection was 23.1% after two months; by contrast, a bivalent booster was 47.3% effective after two months.
In children under five, the efficacy of the primary series was 63.8% two months post-first vaccination and 58.1% after five months.
The effectiveness of a prior Omicron infection against Omicron reinfection was 77.3% after three months, 64.7% after six months, and 45.2% after nine months.
Further, the efficacy of a prior infection against severe outcomes was 61.4%, 58.4%, and 55.1% after three, six, and nine months, respectively.
Conclusions
In summary, vaccination with the mRNA-1273 or BNT162b2 vaccine in children was effective against SARS-CoV-2 infection and severe outcomes, but the efficacy declined over time.
The effectiveness of bivalent boosters was higher than that of monovalent boosters.
Prior infection conferred strong immunity against reinfection(s), but protection waned over time.
Furthermore, vaccination provided additional immunity among those with primary infection; a previous Omicron infection elicited robust immunity, regardless of the vaccination status.
People 65 and older and those who are immunocompromised are now eligible for another COVID-19 booster shot.
In an amendment issued Tuesday, the Food and Drug Administration changed the authorization for boosters from Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech to allow them to be given a second time to people whose protection against COVID-19 likely fades quickly.
For healthy, younger people, new boosters are not yet needed, the agency said, promising to make a recommendation for them early this summer.
The new ruling allows:
People over 65 to get another booster at least four months after their previous one.
People with some immunocompromising conditions to get boosters as often as every two months, at their doctor's recommendation.
COVID-19 vaccines have been very effective at preventing severe disease and death, but protection against mild disease fades after a few months, studies show.
For healthy, younger people, an infection is not likely to be serious.
But for people whose protection is already limited by age or immune status, every infection could be dangerous, which is why the FDA wants them to have access to more frequent shots.
Latest research: mRNA vaccines used for COVID are showing promise against cancer
More:White House to invest $5 billion in next-generation COVID vaccines
FDA to decide which variants the fall COVID vaccines should address
All Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech shots are now considered "bivalent" because they take aim at both the original virus and the BA.4/BA.5 variants.
None of those remains in the U.S., according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, but protection against them seems to cover the known variants.
XBB.1.5 remains the dominant variant in the U.S., as it has been since January, though it's prevalence is beginning to slip slightly, replaced by other XBB variants.
The XBB variants are descendants of the original omicron variant, which swept across the world in late 2021 and early 2022.
In June, an FDA advisory committee will meet to discuss which variants COVID vaccines should address this fall, an approach typically used for flu vaccines.
Novavax prepping COVID booster for this fall
Novavax, which uses a traditional protein-based technology for its COVID vaccine, also plans to have its shots available for the fall, though it takes longer to manufacture than the two mRNA vaccines.
Silvia Taylor, the company's chief corporate affairs and advocacy officer, said Novavax is working closely with the FDA and is currently manufacturing several options "at risk," only making available whichever one the FDA chooses to pursue.
Pandemic and fertility: COVID led to the biggest drop in births in 50 years.
But not in every state.
What is now considered fully vaccinated?
The FDA's moves also aim to simplify the vaccine regimen, now that the vast majority of Americans have had at least one shot or infection, or likely both.
Because they have likely been infected already, anyone who has not yet been vaccinated can now get one shot, rather than three, to be considered protected, the FDA said.
Here's how it breaks down for young children:
•Unvaccinated children ages 6 months through 5 years of age may receive a two-dose series of the Moderna vaccine or a three-dose series of the Pfizer-BioNTech bivalent vaccine (although that one is aimed at children 6 months to age 4).
•Unvaccinated children who are 5 may receive two doses of the Moderna vaccine or a single dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine.
•Vaccinated children 6 months through 5 years – who have already received one, two or three vaccine doses – may get a booster, but the number of doses they receive will depend on the vaccine and their vaccination history, the FDA said.
COVID and pregnancy:Does infection lead to neurodevelopmental problems in babies?
'Vaccines prevent the most serious outcomes'
In a statement Tuesday, Dr. Peter Marks, who directs the FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, explained the move:
“At this stage of the pandemic, data support simplifying the use of the authorized mRNA bivalent COVID-19 vaccines and the agency believes that this approach will help encourage future vaccination.
"COVID-19 continues to be a very real risk for many people, and we encourage individuals to consider staying current with vaccination, including with a bivalent COVID-19 vaccine.
The available data continue to demonstrate that vaccines prevent the most serious outcomes of COVID-19, which are severe illness, hospitalization, and death.”
Contact Karen Weintraub at kweintraub@usatoday.com.
Health and patient safety coverage at USA TODAY is made possible in part by a grant from the Masimo Foundation for Ethics, Innovation and Competition in Healthcare.
The Masimo Foundation does not provide editorial input.
Image
Español 简体中文 한국어 Tagalog Việt
Have a COVID-19 test you think may be expired?
Read more about expiration date information for FDA-authorized at-home OTC COVID-19 diagnostic tests.
COVID-19 testing plays a critical role in the fight against the virus.
Understanding COVID-19 tests, including the different types of tests and their uses, and the types of samples the tests use, is key to making an informed decision that meets your needs.
Types of Tests
There are different types of COVID-19 tests – diagnostic tests and antibody tests.
Diagnostic tests can show if you currently are infected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
There are two common types of COVID-19 diagnostic tests:
Molecular tests, such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and other nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) tests, which detect genetic material called RNA from the virus
Antigen tests, often referred to as rapid tests or, for some, at-home or self tests, which detect proteins called antigens from the virus
Samples for COVID-19 diagnostic tests are typically collected using an anterior nares (nasal) swab sample.
Some diagnostic tests use other samples such as mid-turbinate, nasopharyngeal, oropharyngeal, or saliva samples.
Depending on the intended use, COVID-19 diagnostic tests can be performed at a laboratory, a standalone testing site, a doctor’s office or health clinic, or at home.
For most molecular COVID-19 diagnostic tests, you go to a testing site to have your sample collected and for others you can collect your own sample at home using a home collection kit and mail it to a laboratory for testing.
Some tests, including most antigen tests, can be performed completely at home, giving you results within minutes, without needing to send your sample to a laboratory.
If you think you need a COVID-19 diagnostic test, you can find a community testing site in your state.
You can also use an FDA-authorized at-home COVID-19 diagnostic test which gives you the option of self-testing where it is convenient for you.
Be sure to check the At-Home OTC COVID-19 Diagnostic Tests website for information on expiration dates, who can use the test, and other details that may help you decide what test is right for you.
Be aware that COVID-19 diagnostic tests are authorized for specific uses and that laboratory-based molecular COVID-19 tests, are generally more accurate than at-home tests.
To increase the accuracy of an at-home COVID-19 antigen diagnostic test, it is important to perform repeat testing, after 48 hours, following a negative test result, whether you have symptoms or not, to reduce your risk of a false negative test result.
For more information about how to reduce your risk of getting a false negative result on an at-home COVID-19 antigen test, read our FDA Safety Communication.
For additional information on reading and understanding your test results, see Understanding At-Home OTC COVID-19 Antigen Diagnostic Test Results.
For details about each authorized COVID-19 diagnostic test, see the lists of authorized Molecular Diagnostic Tests and Antigen Diagnostic Tests, as well as the At-Home COVID-19 Diagnostic Tests webpage.
Using the search box in the EUA tables, you can use keywords to search and filter the type of test or collection kit you are looking for.
As new tests are authorized for use, they are added to these tables so that anyone can access up-to-date information on all authorized tests and collection kits.
Antibody (or serology) tests look for antibodies in your blood that your immune system produced in response to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
Antibody tests should not be used to diagnose a current SARS-CoV-2 infection or COVID-19 and, at this time, should also not be used to check for immunity.
More research is needed to determine what, if anything, antibody tests can tell us about a person’s immunity.
Samples for antibody tests are typically collected by a doctor or other medical professional by taking blood from a finger stick or your vein.
For more information about antibody testing, visit Antibody (Serology) Testing for COVID-19: Information for Patients and Consumers.
Types of Samples
Different tests are authorized to be used with different types of samples.
The most common sample types are:
Swab samples use a swab (similar to a long Q-Tip) to collect a sample from the nose or throat.
The types of samples include:
Anterior Nares (Nasal) – takes a sample from just inside the nostrils
Mid-turbinate – takes a sample from further up inside the nose
Nasopharyngeal – takes a sample from deep inside the nose, reaching the back of the throat, and should only be collected by a trained health care provider
Oropharyngeal – takes a sample from the middle part of the throat (pharynx) just beyond the mouth, and should only be collected by a trained health care provider
Saliva samples are collected by spitting into a tube rather than using a nose or throat swab.
Blood samples are only used to test for antibodies and not to diagnose COVID-19.
Venous blood samples are typically collected at a doctor’s office or clinic.
Some antibody tests use blood samples from a finger stick.
Read More
You can read more about the individual types of tests, safety communications and how to interpret your test results at the links below:
Report Adverse Events
The FDA encourages health care professionals and patients to report adverse events or side effects as well as performance issues related to the use of COVID-19 tests or other medical products to the FDA’s MedWatch Safety Information and Adverse Event Reporting Program:
Housing prices jumped during the COVID-19 pandemic as remote work caused many Americans to reconsider their living situations.
Rent prices also rose, with inflation-adjusted median rent growing from $1,163 in 2019 to $1,191 in 2021, according to the US Census Bureau.
However, the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) fair market rent data provides a more up-to-date and local look at rent across the US.
Calculated fair market rents correspond to the 40th percentile of rent that new tenants in a given area are paying.
For example, if a county’s fair market rent for a one-bedroom apartment is $1,000, then 40% of one-bedroom apartments in that county cost less than $1,000 and 60% of rents cost more.
Data is updated one to two times every year.
2023 fair market rent data shows that compared to 2020, the last fair market rent data release before COVID-19, one-bedroom unit rents increased in 58% of counties in the US after adjusting for inflation.
Rents rose in every county in Arizona, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island while rising in just two of Alaska’s 30 counties.
Wyoming and Louisiana also had just a few counties with rent increases.
This article was updated on January 23, 2023, to reflect the most recent information and recommendations.
The original COVID-19 boosters did a great job of preventing severe illness and hospitalization, even during the delta surge.
Then came omicron and its subvariants, which not only were more transmissible than previous variants but evaded infection- and vaccine-provoked immunity.
The boosters needed an update.
In this Q&A, adapted from the October 3 episode of Public Health On Call, Stephanie Desmon speaks with virologist Andy Pekosz, PhD, a professor in Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, about what makes bivalent boosters different—and more effective.
Pekosz discusses who should get the bivalent shot and when, whether it’s safe to get it at the same time as the flu shot, and more.
What is the bivalent booster?
The bivalent booster is the most recent version of the COVID-19 vaccine.
It contains both the original vaccine strain [of the virus] and a strain derived from the BA.5 omicron variant, which is currently dominating here in the U.S., so that we can maximize protection against severe disease and potentially from infection.
Who should be getting one?
And when?
Bivalent boosters are available for people ages 6 months and older who have completed their COVID-19 vaccine primary series.
The CDC recommends one bivalent booster dose:
For everyone ages 5 years and older if it has been at least two months since your last dose.
For children ages 6 months–4 years who completed the Moderna primary series if it has been at least two months since their last dose.
The CDC offers guidance for all age groups and situations on its website, including an interactive questionnaire to help people determine if and when they or their children should get a booster.
I had COVID almost two months ago.
When would I need my booster shot?
According to the latest CDC guidance, people who have not yet received a bivalent booster should get it at least three months after a COVID-19 infection.
If that recommendation changes, it will be reflected on the CDC’s website.
So this booster may be the one that will protect us for the longest time.
This issue will always be the emergence of a variant with different properties—something we never can never predict.
While the BQ and XBB variant families, which took hold in the U.S. in late 2022, are more immune-evasive than the original omicron strain, the bivalent booster still appears to be effective in reducing the risk of severe disease.
If you’re eligible to receive the bivalent booster, get it.
Should people who’ve had two initial doses and two booster shots be getting this booster now?
Yes, because the bivalent booster will give you a better response to the currently circulating variants.
The CDC recommendation is that everyone 5 years and older get the bivalent booster at least two months after their last dose or at least three months after a COVID-19 infection.
There is also some data that suggest waiting as long as six months after your last dose may help establish a stronger, longer-lived immune response.
We’ve shifted from the pandemic strategy—getting immunity as fast as possible to as many people as possible—to the strategy of getting long-term immunity to people.
Hopefully we can avoid having boosters every few months to try to maintain protection in the population.
Should kids and teens who had the original vaccines and a booster get the bivalent booster?
Yes.
And again, four to six months after that last booster is a good time to get the bivalent booster.
That will increase your [immune system’s] long-term memory, as well as give you better protection against the circulating viruses.
At the beginning of the pandemic, it was really straightforward: You were either infected or you weren’t.
And then we got the vaccine.
Now we have combinations of vaccination and infection.
Maybe some people got infected and then vaccinated; maybe some people got infected before the booster and then got a booster afterward.
All of these different combinations are going to give a slightly different immune response.
It’s getting more and more difficult to make simple, straightforward statements about what’s best for people because there’s so much difference in their immune responses based on their exposure history.
Are we seeing any changes in the side effects from the bivalent booster?
No, everything’s the same as has been reported with the original bivalent booster.
It’s important to note that the dose of this bivalent booster is exactly the same as the dose of the previous booster.
It’s just that there are two different forms of the spike protein in the vaccine.
All the reported side effects are essentially the same as with the boosters.
What do we know about how well the bivalent vaccine actually works?
The FDA saw data from both Moderna and Pfizer in June that showed that a bivalent vaccine induced better responses against omicron than another dose of the original booster vaccine.
Up until then, they had tried bivalent vaccines with other variants, but they never performed better than the booster with just the original vaccine strain.
Then, in June, the [omicron] bivalent booster data showed that it was better
[than the original booster].
But the FDA went one step ahead and said, “the data we saw was with another omicron variant, BA.1.
But we know that BA.5 is now dominating,” So, they told the vaccine manufacturers to update that BA.1 to BA.5.
In hindsight, that looks like a great move because we are maximizing the match between the circulating viruses and the vaccine strains.
What that means, though, is that we don’t have long-term studies in terms of how efficacious it is with this specific BA.5.
We can infer from all the other studies that it will be good.
But that’s the data we’re trying to collect through a number of studies going on right now.
Is vaccine-induced immunity better than immunity from infection?
Vaccine-induced immunity is better because it’s safer, and it induces the kind of immunity that is going to protect you from disease.
When you get infected, you have all these other symptoms from the virus wreaking havoc in your system.
The bivalent booster, particularly on top of an infection, is going to strengthen your immune responses to very high levels and do so in a safe way.
It will be important for individuals who’ve been infected to get the bivalent booster.
The spacing will be the thing to think about—again, that four- to six-month window is what you need to strengthen [immune] responses and help them turn into long-term immunity.
WILL THERE BE AN UPDATED BIVALENT BOOSTER?
The SARS-CoV-2 virus has changed significantly since the bivalent boosters were initially rolled out.
As such, we can expect an updated booster at some point in the future, but we don’t have any information on when that would be or what it would entail.
For now, everyone should continue to follow the CDC guidance for staying up to date on vaccines.
The FDA will be meeting to discuss a strategy for selecting future COVID-19 vaccines and the timing of the vaccinations, so we should have additional information soon.
Can you get the flu shot and the new booster at the same time?
Absolutely.
CDC says there’s nothing wrong with getting both at the same time.
I think it’s probably one of those situations where if you’re going in to get one, it’s probably good to get the other.
We know from past experience that when people go in to get one vaccine and say, “Well, I’ll get the next one in a week or two,” a lot of them never come back.
If you have the opportunity to get both, I would say get them at the same time.
Both will be aiming to do the same thing: protect from severe disease.
Many of the same populations that are vulnerable to severe COVID are the same populations that are vulnerable to severe influenza.
Is there any advantage to spreading them out?
Not really.
The people who have been studied who have gotten both together don’t report any different side effects, any different adverse effects.
If you do feel the need to split up your vaccines, get your COVID booster first because there’s a lot more COVID around right now than flu, and then go back and get your flu shot.
But there really isn’t any reason why you shouldn’t get both at the same time.
Stephanie Desmon is the co-host of the Public Health On Call podcast.
She is the director of public relations and marketing for the Johns Hopkins Center for Communication Programs, the largest center at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
RELATED:
COVID-19 is a type of coronavirus caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
Some people with eczema may find that developing COVID-19 aggravates their symptoms.
COVID-19 is highly contagious and can present in different ways.
It sometimes occurs with mild or no symptoms, while some people experience severe symptoms and complications that can lead to hospitalization or death.
Research has found links between COVID-19 and eczema flare-ups, possibly due to more frequent handwashing, increased stress, and other causes.
Coronavirus data All data and statistics are based on publicly available data at the time of publication.
Some information may be out of date.
Visit our coronavirus hub for the most recent information on COVID-19.
Was this helpful?
This article looks at eczema and how COVID-19 might affect it.
We also consider treatment and prevention for COVID-19 and eczema and when to consult a doctor.
What is eczema?
Share on Pinterest Cavan Images/Massimiliano Finzi/Getty Images Eczema is an inflammatory skin condition.
People often use the words eczema and atopic dermatitis interchangeably, as atopic dermatitis is the most common form of the disorder.
Atopic refers to conditions involving the immune system, including eczema, hay fever, and asthma.
Dermatitis refers to inflammation of the skin.
Eczema is common, affecting 31.6 million people in the United States.
Symptoms of eczema vary from person to person and are dependent on the severity of the condition, a person’s age, and other factors.
People with eczema typically experience periodic flare-ups.
Symptoms generally include: itching
patches of red, scaly, dry skin
sores that can open and ooze when a person scratches them In People of Color, symptoms may also include: a brown or gray rash
lighter or darker patches of skin which may last even when other symptoms have gone away
How might COVID-19 affect eczema?
Evidence suggests that people with eczema are not at greater risk of contracting COVID-19 than those who do not have eczema.
In people with eczema, the immune system does not work correctly, but it is not compromised.
Eczema occurs due to an overactive immune system.
Interestingly, the overactive immune system in a person with eczema may be a factor in lowering the risk of COVID-19.
Research has found atopic diseases, including eczema, are associated with 23% lower odds of developing COVID-19.
In addition, people with both eczema and asthma had 38% lower odds of infection.
However, COVID-19 can also exacerbate eczema symptoms.
People may experience more severe eczema symptoms more regularly because of COVID-19-related circumstances.
Frequent handwashing SARS-CoV-2 often transmits via airborne droplets that a person breathes in.
Droplets and particles may also land on surfaces or a person’s face, nose, or hands.
One of the ways to avoid the spread of SARS-CoV-2 includes regular handwashing.
Experts recommend people wash their hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use a hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not readily available.
Frequent washing may lead to dry skin on the hands, which can become scaly and brittle and lead to an eczema flare-up.
Healthcare workers with eczema may experience even greater trauma to the skin on their hands due to constant washing and infection-prevention practices.
A 2021 review found that healthcare workers in China and the UK experienced a significant increase in skin trauma due to continuous handwashing in response to COVID-19.
Changes in treatment Without treatment, symptoms of eczema can worsen.
One 2021 study involving 36 participants suggests people with eczema were less likely to seek medical care because they did not want to burden the system with nonemergency situations during the pandemic.
People also found it more challenging to get appointments and lacked trust in telephone consultations.
Wearing masks According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , anyone older than 2 years should wear a well-fitting mask indoors in public areas where the COVID-19 community level is high.
For some people with eczema, a protective mask that rubs against the skin for long periods may worsen or trigger eczema.
Increased stress Emotional stress may trigger an eczema flare-up.
COVID-19 brought about many challenges and worries, which increased stress levels for many people.
Treatment There is no cure for eczema, but people can manage the condition with treatment.
Eczema treatment A doctor or dermatologist can treat eczema with a combination of therapies, such as medication, skin care, and phototherapy.
Doctors may prescribe the following medications to treat eczema: corticosteroid creams or ointments to decrease inflammation
moisturizing creams to help repair the skin barrier
biologic medication, which blocks certain functions of the immune system
immune inhibitors, such as Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors A doctor may also recommend skin care strategies such as moisturizing after showering or bathing and avoiding harsh skin care products or products with strong scents.
Another potential treatment option is phototherapy or light therapy.
This procedure involves using ultraviolet light to reduce inflammation.
COVID-19-induced eczema treatment To avoid drying out the hands from frequent handwashing, which may trigger an eczema flare-up, a person can try using warm water rather than hot water, pat hands dry afterward, and apply moisturizer.
They may benefit from using a gentle hand cleanser for sensitive skin.
If masks irritate facial eczema, a person can invest in a soft, high quality mask that is less likely to roughly rub against the skin.
To reduce stress, a person can try relaxation techniques such as meditation and breathing exercises or reach out to the Disaster Distress Hotline by calling or texting 1-800-985-5990 for immediate crisis counseling.
COVID-19 treatment Treatment for COVID-19 happens on a case-by-case basis, as the severity and symptoms of the virus differ between people.
Treatment may involve medication, such as the corticosteroid dexamethasone or the antiviral drugs Paxlovid, molnupiravir, or Veklury (remdesivir).
Prevention There are steps a person can take to help prevent eczema and COVID-19.
Eczema To prevent an eczema flare-up, the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases recommends that people should try: following a skin care routine and moisturize with appropriate products regularly
preventing irritations to the skin by avoiding harsh products and clothing that rubs or irritates
managing stress
maintaining comfortable temperatures that are not too hot or cold COVID-19
The CDC recommends that people can help prevent the spread of SARS-CoV-2 by: washing their hands regularly
cleaning and disinfecting surfaces
wearing a mask
getting fully vaccinated
staying 6 feet away from others
avoiding poorly ventilated areas and crowds
covering sneezes and coughs
getting tested
taking precautions when traveling
A person with eczema should contact a doctor if: eczema is affecting their day-to-day life
over-the-counter medication is ineffective
the eczema lesions look infected, with pus or red streaks
eczema lesions cover a large area of the body A person with COVID-19 should seek medical care if their breathing is affected or symptoms are severe.
They should call ahead to the medical facility if possible.
No state was in a better position than California to cope with the Covid-19 pandemic.
It had a relatively young population, a climate that encouraged people to spend time outdoors, a tech industry that profited from the pandemic’s surge in online traffic, and top-flight medical and research institutions with some of the world’s leading experts on public health and epidemiology.
But no state inflicted so much needless suffering for so long on its children and adults.
When the pandemic began, researchers in California were the first in the United States to analyze the threat accurately and offer sensible advice, urging focused protection for the elderly, while warning that school closures and lockdowns were futile and destructive.
But instead of heeding their expertise, the progressives dominating the state’s public and private institutions launched campaigns to defame, ostracize, and silence them.
These experts, like so many other fleeing Californians, had to leave the state to find leaders who embraced scientific analysis and rational policies.
No other state infringed upon individual liberties more zealously.
California was the first to lock down and the last to end its state of emergency (at the end of February of this year).
It closed not only schools and businesses but also playgrounds, parks, and beaches.
A police boat in Malibu chased down a solitary surfer so that he could be arrested and handcuffed; another surfer was fined $1,000 for endangering precisely no one.
Church gatherings were outlawed for nearly a year, until the Supreme Court finally overturned the ban.
Other courts had to intervene to keep public schools in San Diego and Los Angeles from mandating vaccines for students.
California suffered one of the nation’s worst spikes in unemployment during the pandemic, and it was one of the slowest to recover economically, despite the increased profits flowing to Silicon Valley.
In the spring of 2021, it ranked 47th among the states in a Moody’s Analytics index of economic metrics of recovery.
It remained among the bottom dozen at the end of last year, when the 24 percent vacancy rate in San Francisco’s office buildings inspired headlines about “the most empty downtown in America.”
Over the first two years of the pandemic, according to a scorecard by a team of economists, California ranked 39th among the states in overall economic performance and dead last in providing in-school instruction to students.
Yet the state’s leaders remain unapologetic.
Governor Gavin Newsom insists that his policies were guided by “the science and data,” while using deceitful statistics to claim falsely that Florida’s less restrictive Covid policies were deadlier than California’s authoritarianism.
Instead of acknowledging that the lockdowns were unnecessarily costly, he boasts how much the state spent to mitigate his errors: nearly $40 billion in direct payments and tax relief (which would have been more than enough to offset the state’s current projected budget deficit of $23 billion).
Instead of encouraging scientific debate, Newsom signed the nation’s first state law, recently blocked by a federal judge, subjecting doctors to discipline by the state’s medical board if they provide their patients with Covid “misinformation.”
That word presumably means anything challenging the orthodoxy enforced so disastrously during the pandemic.
The crackdown on dissent began at Stanford in the spring of 2020, when John Ioannidis, an epidemiologist and one of the world’s most cited scientists, warned that lockdowns could be a “once-in-a-century fiasco” because they were being imposed without any consideration of costs and benefits.
He joined with Stanford colleagues, including Jay Bhattacharya, a professor of health policy at the medical school, to measure the spread of Covid in two California counties.
Their results (subsequently confirmed by other researchers) showed that the fatality rate among the general population was much lower than the estimates being used by computer modelers, whose doomsday projections (2 million Americans dead by summer’s end, hospitals overwhelmed by 30 Covid patients for every available bed) terrified Newsom and other governors into locking down and ordering nursing homes to accept Covid patients from hospitals.
For daring to question the doomsday narrative, the Stanford researchers found themselves vilified in the media and bombarded with personal threats.
The university’s administrators were cowed into hiring an outside law firm to conduct a fact-finding inquiry into a spurious accusation of bias.
The inquiry found no bias, but the researchers endured continuing harassment from some Stanford administrators and faculty.
“Academic freedom at Stanford is clearly dying,” Bhattacharya wrote in a recent essay recounting the hostility he faced after coauthoring the Great Barrington Declaration, a critique of lockdowns signed by thousands of scientists around the world in the fall of 2020—but that remained taboo for discussion at Stanford.
Bhattacharya’s department chairman blocked his attempt to hold a seminar discussing the declaration, and the medical school never invited him to present an alternative to the Covid orthodoxy that it was promoting.
California officials ignored his advice.
After Bhattacharya spoke at a roundtable hosted by Florida governor Ron DeSantis and questioned the evidence for masking schoolchildren, activists put Bhattacharya’s face on posters around the Stanford campus blaming him for deaths in Florida, and the chairman of epidemiology at Stanford circulated a petition at the medical school asking the university to censor such speech.
The social-media platforms in Silicon Valley censored the video of that Florida roundtable and other postings by Bhattacharya, as well as those of a fellow heretic at Stanford, Scott Atlas, a health-policy analyst at the Hoover Institution also consulted by DeSantis.
Atlas predicted early in the pandemic that lockdowns would cost more lives than they saved and opposed them while serving on the Trump administration’s coronavirus task force.
The Stanford faculty senate voted to declare his actions “anathema to our community,” and three Stanford professors published an article in the Journal of the American Medical Association urging that he be punished by medical societies and licensing boards for “unprofessional conduct.”
Another early critic of lockdowns, Joseph A. Ladapo, fared no better in persuading his medical school colleagues at the University of California–Los Angeles.
Dozens of UCLA professors signed a petition denouncing him for speaking out against Covid orthodoxy.
As he recalls in a pandemic memoir, Transcend Fear, one colleague sent an e-mail to the chancellor (subject line: “Why does UCLA employ Dr. Ladapo?”) urging the university to issue a formal renunciation.
Ladapo’s superiors sought unsuccessfully to vet his articles before publication.
“My boss complained that she was spending half her time dealing with complaints about me,” Ladapo says.
“I basically became an outcast in my department.”
But he, too, was welcomed by DeSantis, who appointed him Florida’s surgeon general in the fall of 2021.
By then, Florida had already recovered to pre-pandemic levels of economic performance, and its mortality statistics were below the national average, despite its rejection of mask mandates and vaccine passports.
When the CDC urged parents to vaccinate all their children, Ladapo weighed the minuscule benefits to healthy children against the risk of serious side effects, ultimately recommending against vaccinating kids—the same policy adopted in Sweden, Denmark, Norway, the United Kingdom, and other European countries.
In California, by contrast, Newsom issued an order (currently suspended until at least the next school year) requiring all students above kindergarten to be vaccinated, and the state continues to urge jabs for all children older than six months.
When Newsom finally ended the nearly three-year-long state of emergency, he claimed that 56,000 more Californians would have died of Covid if he had followed Florida’s policies, basing that estimate on Florida’s higher rate of Covid mortality.
But that’s not a valid comparison.
When statisticians properly adjust for the age structure in each state—Florida has a much higher share of vulnerable elderly people—the rates in both states are below the national average.
California’s rate is just slightly lower, and that difference is largely due to another confounding factor: the per-capita mortality calculations are based on each state’s population in the 2020 Census, but Florida’s population has been growing rapidly since then, while California’s has been shrinking.
If you adjust for the actual population of both states during the pandemic, their per-capita Covid mortality rates are almost identical.
Newsom prefers to avoid discussing a more important difference: the rate of overall excess mortality, the number of deaths above normal from all causes during the pandemic.
That rate is higher in California, particularly among younger adults who died from causes other than Covid—many presumably victims of the lockdown’s disruptions.
If California’s excess-mortality rate over the first two years of the pandemic had equaled Florida’s, about 10,000 fewer Californians would have died.
And if the state had heeded its own experts instead of its authoritarian leaders, tens of millions of Californians would have enjoyed healthier, wealthier, and happier lives.
Photo:
Along with like-minded colleagues, Stanford medical school professor Jay Bhattacharya found himself vilified in the media and bombarded with personal threats for daring to question the Covid doomsday narrative.
(TOM WILLIAMS/CQ ROLL CALL/AP IMAGES)
WASHINGTON — The divided 118th Congress approved its first bill Friday, after lawmakers in both the House and Senate voted unanimously to send President Joe Biden legislation that would require declassification of intelligence on the origins of COVID-19.
The four-page bill, which the House voted 419-0 to clear, would require the Director of National Intelligence to “declassify any and all information relating to potential links between the Wuhan Institute of Virology and the origin of the Coronavirus Disease 2019” within 90 days of becoming law.
The measure allows the director to redact any information that would risk sources and methods the intelligence community used to gather the information.
The Democratically controlled Senate approved the bill earlier this month by unanimous consent, a fast-track process that allows that chamber to pass bills as long as no senator objects.
Missouri Sen. Josh Hawley introduced the bill with Sens. Mike Braun of Indiana, Roger Marshall of Kansas, Mike Lee of Utah and Rick Scott of Florida as original co-sponsors.
All are Republicans.
“This is a great first step in holding China accountable for this crisis, and I urge President Biden to sign it immediately,” Hawley said in a news release.
“The American people deserve to know the truth.”
Connecticut Democratic Rep. Jim Himes, ranking member on the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, said during floor debate that determining how COVID-19 began has been especially challenging due to the Chinese government.
“At every juncture, the PRC government has obfuscated and obstructed legitimate inquiries and investigations into the origins of the disease,” Himes said.
“China’s approach has been deeply irresponsible and dangerous to global public health.”
That is one of the reasons, Himes said, Biden ordered the U.S. intelligence community to look into the origins of the virus, leading to an unclassified report in August 2021.
“In short, the intelligence community agencies could not come to an agreement on whether the virus originated from a lab accident or from natural exposure,” Himes said.
“Some individual agencies did reach a judgment, a narrow judgment, about which path was more likely, but they could not do so with high confidence — simply because we don’t have enough reliable information to draw those conclusions,” Himes added.
Declassifying more intelligence about the origins of COVID-19, Himes said, could be an “antidote to the speculation, the rumor and the theories that grow in the absence of good information.”
Ohio Republican Rep. Mike Turner, chair of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, said that Americans deserve “answers to every aspect of the COVID-19 pandemic, including how this virus was created.”
“The COVID-19 pandemic wreaked havoc across the country with almost every household feeling its effects,” Turner said.
“The United States death toll from this virus has surpassed 1 million people.”
Turner said the intelligence committee “is aware of classified information that could help inform the public why COVID-19 as a lab leak theory is not just a possibility, but approaches the idea that it is likely.”
The U.S. House Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Pandemic held a hearing on the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic earlier this week, with the majority of the panel’s lawmakers agreeing the scientific and intelligence communities should be left alone to determine the virus’ origins.
While there is yet no consensus about the origins of COVID-19, the experts who testified before the panel said researchers are working to determine if it was a spillover event from nature or if the virus was accidentally leaked from a laboratory.
Congress passed a joint resolution earlier this week to block a restructuring of the District of Columbia’s criminal code that the city government had approved.
While the joint resolution moved through Congress much like a bill and is expected to garner Biden’s signature to take effect, it’s not technically a bill.
That makes the origins of COVID-19 bill the first legislation to pass the divided Congress this year.
California won't make children get the coronavirus vaccine to attend schools, state public health officials said Friday, reversing a state policy first announced by Gov. Gavin Newsom in 2021.
The nation's most populous state plans to formally end its coronavirus emergency order on Feb. 28, ending some of Newsom's authority to quickly alter or change laws.
As the state prepares to end that order, it has also backed away from plans to issue emergency regulations adding the COVID-19 vaccine to the list of required school vaccinations, the California Department of Public Health said in a statement.
Any effort to do so would need to go through the Legislature, the statement said.
The department "is not currently exploring emergency rulemaking to add COVID-19 vaccinations to the list of required school vaccinations, but we continue to strongly recommend COVID-19 immunization for students and staff to keep everyone safer in the classroom," the statement said.
Newsom in Oct. 2021 said California would require coronavirus vaccines for school kids with some exceptions, making him the first governor to announce such a plan.
Then, last year, state officials said the requirement would be delayed until at least summer 2023 while the state waited for the Food and Drug Administration to give the vaccines final approval.
Dr. Anne Rimoin, a professor of epidemiology at UCLA's Field School of Public Health, said that even without a mandate people should still get vaccinated.
"Mandates are disappearing across the board here," she said.
"It's really going to be up to the individual to think about what choice they're making, and the impact of those choices will be."
Educators and students are beginning to see where billions of dollars in federal Covid-relief aid to local school districts are going: new teachers and tutors, construction projects to repair ventilation systems and leaking roofs, and new textbooks and computer labs.
To determine how this unprecedented infusion of federal aid is going to be used, FutureEd spent several months analyzing local spending plans in a database compiled by the data-services firm Burbio.
The 5,000 plans represent districts and charter organizations serving 74 percent of public school students and spending $83 billion of the federal Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief (ESSER III) aid flowing to K-12 schools.
While the plans can and will change, our findings provide early answers to six key questions.
1.
What are the top priorities based on dollars designated?
Our analysis shows that three priorities—staffing, academic recovery and facilities—account for more than 75 percent of planned spending.
The analysis also provides dollar figures and projections for spending in key categories.
Read the analysis
2.
What are the top priorities based on the number of districts?
Hiring and rewarding teachers has consistently emerged as the most popular priority in district plans with HVAC updates and summer learning also appearing frequently.
We divide the top priorities into five broad categories and provide a resource page for each.
Read the analysis
3.
How do district poverty levels influence planned spending?
Districts with high rates of students living in poverty have far more ESSER money to spend—and are earmarking it for different priorities than more affluent places.
In many cases—particularly instructional materials and HVAC repairs—districts plan to use the federal money to address longstanding needs.
Read the analysis
4.
How do district settings—rural, town, city or suburban—affect planned spending?
The patterns we discern often reflect the realities of the varied geographic areas.
Rural districts, for instance, are more likely to designate ESSER III dollars for transportation, while cities are more likely to spend on mental health workers and social-emotional learning.
Read the analysis
5.
How does political partisanship influence planned spending?
Despite the divisive rhetoric around education, we found districts in red states and blue states have relatively similar priorities for their Covid-relief dollars.
Nearly the same percentage have earmarked funds for social-emotional learning, tutoring, teacher training and new school infrastructure.
Read the analysis
6.
How does planned spending break down on a per-pupil basis?
Some educational priorities are simply more expensive than others.
Hence, HVAC updates require the highest per-pupil expenditures in our analysis of expected costs, even though more districts plan to spend on hiring and rewarding academic staff.
This piece also includes a regional breakdown of priorities.
Read the analysis
In addition to answering these questions, FutureEd has researched how districts are spending on three key priorities, both using the Burbio data and our own review of plans for many of the largest school districts:
We also worked with two Connecticut nonprofit partners for a deep dive into a single state, using the state’s own grants database and comparing the findings to Burbio’s national numbers.
CNN —
It’s time to stock up on tissues, bingeable TV options and Covid-19 tests.
Yes, many signs are pointing to a Covid-19 summer surge – although one that’s far less intense than what emerged the past few summers.
Experts say they do not expect that cases will be severe or that the uptick will be prolonged, and there are early signs from wastewater data that this wavelet may already be leveling out.
But data posted this week by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shows that many Covid-19 indicators, including hospital admissions, emergency department visits and test positivity, are once again on the rise.
Independent commercial laboratories are also noting the increase.
“When we look at our data, we have noticed that since late June to the beginning of July and probably through now, there has been a mild uptick in cases and these are based on samples sourced from pharmacy-based testing and also from health system-based testing,” said Shishi Luo, associate director of bioinformatics at Helix, a gene sequencing company which has been assisting the CDC with tracking the gene changes of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19.
Based on the mix of samples Helix receives, Luo says, it has seen a 30% to 40% increase in cases since June.
But because cases were already at such a low level when they started to rise, Luo says that even with this upturn, we are still in pretty low-level territory compared with some previous spikes.
“I do see some early signs that we are heading into another wave.
Of course, we don’t know what lies ahead.
So it may yet peter out,” said Caitlin Rivers, an assistant professor in the Department of Environmental Health and Engineering at the John Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
Rivers notes that the tea leaves are particularly hard to read this time around because laboratory testing and other data collection have been dramatically scaled back since the US ended its public health emergency for Covid-19 in May.
She notes that the last time we had so little information on how the virus was spreading was in 2020.
“It doesn’t seem to be driven by a new variant, which I find encouraging,” Rivers said.
Viral levels plateau in wastewater
As testing data has become more limited, wastewater surveillance can offer a more consistent view of transmission trends over time.
Data from Biobot Analytics, a biotechnology firm that has partnered with the CDC, shows that the concentration of coronavirus particles in sewage samples is about a third of what it was at this time last year.
And the amount of virus found in wastewater is growing at a much slower pace than it was a few weeks ago, suggesting a plateau in transmission, said Newsha Ghaeli, president and co-founder of Biobot.
“I wouldn’t say that in every instance a plateau has immediately led to a downturn.
But we do typically see decreases once we hit a plateau,” she said, and that has been the trend in prior summers.
Covid-19 isn’t the only possible cold culprit this summer, either.
CDC data suggests that a number of other pathogens that can cause flu-like symptoms or stomach bugs – including adenovirus, norovirus and rotavirus – are circulating at much higher levels this summer than they were last year.
The CDC is also tracking a slew of co-circulating Covid-19 variants, and all of them seem to be second- or third-generation offshoots of the recombinant variant XBB, each one carrying slight genetic tweaks that make them slightly fitter and more contagious.
But these gradual tweaks to the virus have been expected.
There hasn’t been the kind of out-of-the-blue evolutionary leap that produced the Omicron wave, though many experts think there’s a decent possibility that we could see another game-changing variant like that one within the next couple of years.
Human behavior drives the increase
Instead, this increase seems to be driven by human behavior.
More people are traveling this summer, sending them outside their normal social circles, which helps viruses find new hosts when vacationers return home with unintended souvenirs.
Then there’s the record-breaking heat, which is probably sending more people to congregate indoors for prolonged periods in search of air conditioning.
Finally, immunity has waned.
US vaccination numbers suggest that it has been a while since most Americans have had a Covid-19 booster, and with cases apparently so low, antibody protection from previous infections has probably waned, too.
“Waning immunity clearly is going to play a role in all of this, and we’ve seen this over and over again, is the further out you get, even while there still is some protection against death and serious illness, waning immunity could be important in terms of the number of people who get sufficiently ill to require hospitalization,” said Michael Osterholm, an infectious disease expert who runs the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota.
This is the fourth summer that Covid-19 cases have risen in the United States, and Rivers says she’s pretty convinced that this may just be what living with the virus looks like from now on.
“I’m feeling like summer and winter will be what we expect going forward,” she said.
Advice for managing a summer wave
Rivers said she’s not wearing a mask out in public because cases are still so low, but if the numbers tick up, she would.
“But if I’m traveling on an airplane or I’m getting on the metro, I would definitely want my mask on,” she said.
Rapid testing continues to be a good idea, too.
Experts say that testing when you feel unwell or before you go to a crowded indoor event can help protect those who may be most vulnerable in your life, the elderly and immunocompromised.
Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.
If you’re one of the many Americans who still haven’t gotten a bivalent booster, it might feel tempting to get one now.
Osterholm thinks it might be a good idea to wait until the new boosters targeting the XBB variant come out in September.
“I want to get the new booster,” he said.
“I think the evidence is that the protection of the previous bivalent booster has been reduced over time.
So that if you get it now, though, that’ll hold you back timewise from getting the new booster that hopefully will be out in the next 60 to 80 days.
“I could get infected in that time period.
But I really think that that vaccine is going to be a much better vaccine in terms of long-term protection, so I want to get it as soon as it comes out,” Osterholm said.
Highlights
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic, resulting in disruptions to education at an unprecedented scale.
In response to the urgent need to recover learning losses, countries worldwide have taken RAPID actions to: Reach every child and keep them in school; Assess learning levels regularly; Prioritize teaching the fundamentals; Increase the efficiency of instruction; and Develop psychosocial health and wellbeing.
Marking three years since the onset of the pandemic, this report looks back at policy measures taken during school closures and reopening based on country survey data, initiatives implemented by countries and regions to recover and accelerate learning, and their emerging lessons within each RAPID action.
With schools now reopened worldwide, this report also looks ahead to longer-term education transformation, offering policy recommendations to build more resilient, effective and equitable education systems.
Media Inquiries Name Doug Donovan Email dougdonovan@jhu.edu
Office phone 443-997-9909 Cell phone 443-462-2947
The United States has officially surpassed one million reported COVID-19 deaths, according to data from the Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center.
It's a morbid milestone for a new disease that first emerged in China in late 2019, claimed its first American lives in early 2020, and rapidly became the third leading cause of U.S. deaths.
The number of fatalities is likely much higher both in the United States and around the world, experts from the CRC said.
Globally, approximately 6.3 million people have died of COVID-19, although a recent World Health Organization review has estimated the total could be nearly three times higher—including 110,000 more in the United States than are currently documented.
"The United States has reached the once unthinkable grim milestone of one million COVID-19 deaths," said William Moss, the CRC vaccinology lead and executive director of the Johns Hopkins International Vaccine Access Center.
"Equally tragic, and also once unthinkable, are the recent WHO estimates that the pandemic resulted in nearly 15 million excess deaths globally in 2020 and 2021.
"
Most experts say a million people in the U.S. died from the disease weeks or months ago.
President Joe Biden marked what he called the "tragic milestone" on Thursday of last week by ordering flags to be flown at half-staff and urging citizens to "remain vigilant" against a pandemic that has infected nearly 60% of the U.S. population.
Crystal Watson Public health lead, Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center "People who die from COVID-19 leave behind family and friends, children without parents and grandparents to care for them, spouses and partners, and in some cases parents who must go on without their children.
"
"While one million COVID-19 deaths is a mind-boggling number, we know that the U.S. actually reached this tragic milestone some time ago," said Crystal Watson, the CRC's public health lead and a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security.
"Hundreds of thousands more people have died from COVID-19 in the U.S. than are officially counted," according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Watson said the "public health impact of such widespread death cannot be captured" by the data alone.
"People who die from COVID-19 leave behind family and friends, children without parents and grandparents to care for them, spouses and partners, and in some cases parents who must go on without their children," she added.
"The shock of so many deaths, along with the large number of people now living with long-COVID symptoms, means that this pandemic will unfortunately be felt by individuals, and reflected in our public health data, for a long time to come.
"
Beth Blauer, the CRC data lead and associate vice provost for public sector innovation, said the death toll's tragedy is compounded by the realization that far more have perished.
"But our data reporting and tracking systems are so flawed that local, state, and federal agencies have not been able to provide with full confidence just how deadly this pandemic has been," Blauer said.
"What's worse, the nation has essentially ceased tracking testing results in any way that would be meaningful for equipping the public and policymakers with the best data for making smart decisions on how to proceed with daily life.
"
She cautioned that "the pandemic is not over" regardless of the lifting of mask mandates and other precautions and the reduction in data collection.
"People continue to die every day of COVID-19, some needlessly so," Blauer said.
"Infections continue to spread, but where and how widely becomes a deeper mystery every day the government fails to implement a national strategy for capturing all available testing data, including results from at-home tests.
"
Reported COVID-19 deaths in the United States increased nearly 36%, from around 350,000 in 2020 to nearly 475,000 last year, according to CRC data.
The rate of increase has slowed this year by 23%, from 222,000 deaths recorded in the first four months of 2021 to 170,000 fatalities over the same period in 2022.
But the omicron variant first detected in the United States in late 2021 drove a recent spike in the number of deaths over the past six months—from November 2021 through April—to nearly 250,000.
That represented a 45% increase over the previous six-month period from May 1 to Oct. 31, 2021, according to Emily Pond, a CRC research data analyst.
Data from the CDC indicated that the emergence of COVID-19 as the third leading cause of U.S. deaths after heart disease and cancer in 2020 and 2021 also served to lower life expectancy in both years.
William Moss Vaccinology lead, Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center "We cannot afford to become numb to these numbers.
"
Brian Garibaldi, the CRC's clinical lead and medical director of the Johns Hopkins Biocontainment Unit, said the impact of deaths on hospitals and health care staff has shifted throughout the pandemic.
"In the spring of 2020, nearly half of the deaths we saw in the hospital were in nursing home residents who had severe underlying co-morbidities," Garibaldi said.
"By the time the delta variant arrived, most of the ICU admissions and deaths were occurring in unvaccinated individuals.
"
COVID-19 patients faced a "substantial risk of dying" once they required mechanical ventilation because of their respiratory disease, he said.
"More recently, we have been seeing severe cases among individuals with underlying immune system problems who are unable to mount an effective response to the vaccines," Garibaldi added.
"Vaccines and boosters dramatically reduce the risk of developing severe disease and have really changed the game by reducing the number of patients who require ICU-level care.
"
Moss said many deaths in the United States and around the world could have been averted if more people had received vaccines.
Just two-thirds of the total U.S. population has been fully vaccinated, according to CRC data.
And 40% of the global population—approximately 3 billion people—remain unvaccinated.
Although vaccines could not have prevented the deaths of the nation's most vulnerable citizens—the elderly and immunocompromised individuals—a substantial number of lives would have been saved "had we achieved higher vaccination rates more quickly," Moss said.
"A recent analysis by the Kaiser Family Foundation estimated that 60% of all adult COVID-19 deaths in the United States since June 2021 could have been prevented through vaccination with just the primary series alone, an estimated 234,000 deaths," Moss said.
"We must continue to strive to achieve higher vaccination coverage with COVID-19 vaccines both here in the United States and globally to avert an even greater disaster.
We cannot afford to become numb to these numbers.
"
The deadliest month for the pandemic in the United States was January 2021, when nearly 98,000 people perished—about 3,200 daily, according to an analysis by Pond.
The CRC recorded just under 13,000 deaths in April 2022, about 425 per day.
Not surprisingly the nation's three largest states—California, Texas, and Florida—recorded the most raw number of deaths, according to CRC data.
On a per capita basis, Mississippi, Arizona, and Oklahoma experienced the most deaths per 100,000 residents while Hawaii, Vermont, and Puerto Rico reported the lowest number per capita.
NEW YORK (AP) — The head of the nation’s top public health agency on Wednesday announced a shake-up of the organization, saying it fell short responding to COVID-19 and needs to become more nimble.
The planned changes at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention — CDC leaders call it a “reset”— come amid criticism of the agency’s response to COVID-19, monkeypox and other public health threats.
The changes include internal staffing moves and steps to speed up data releases.
The CDC’s director, Dr. Rochelle Walensky, told the agency’s staff about the changes on Wednesday.
It’s a CDC initiative, and was not directed by the White House or other administration officials, she said.
“I feel like it’s my my responsibility to lead this agency to a better place after a really challenging three years,” Walensky told The Associated Press.
The Atlanta-based agency, with a $12 billion budget and more than 11,000 employees, is charged with protecting Americans from disease outbreaks and other public health threats.
It’s customary for each CDC director to do some reorganizing, but Walensky’s action comes amid a wider demand for change.
The agency has long been criticized as too ponderous, focusing on collection and analysis of data but not acting quickly against new health threats.
Public unhappiness with the agency grew dramatically during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Experts said the CDC was slow to recognize how much virus was entering the U.S. from Europe, to recommend people wear masks, to say the virus can spread through the air, and to ramp up systematic testing for new variants.
“We saw during COVID that CDC’s structures, frankly, weren’t designed to take in information, digest it and disseminate it to the public at the speed necessary,” said Jason Schwartz, a health policy researcher at the Yale School of Public Health.
Walensky, who became director in January 2021, has long said the agency has to move faster and communicate better, but stumbles have continued during her tenure.
In April, she called for an in-depth review of the agency, which resulted in the announced changes.
“It’s not lost on me that we fell short in many ways” responding to the coronavirus, Walensky said.
“We had some pretty public mistakes, and so much of this effort was to hold up the mirror ... to understand where and how we could do better.”
Her reorganization proposal must be approved by the Department of Health and Human Services secretary.
CDC officials say they hope to have a full package of changes finalized, approved and underway by early next year.
Some changes still are being formulated, but steps announced Wednesday include:
—Increasing use of preprint scientific reports to get out actionable data, instead of waiting for research to go through peer review and publication by the CDC journal Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.
—Restructuring the agency’s communications office and further revamping CDC websites to make the agency’s guidance for the public more clear and easier to find.
—Altering the length of time agency leaders are devoted to outbreak responses to a minimum of six months — an effort to address a turnover problem that at times caused knowledge gaps and affected the agency’s communications.
—Creation of a new executive council to help Walensky set strategy and priorities.
—Appointing Mary Wakefield as senior counselor to implement the changes.
Wakefield headed the Health Resources and Services Administration during the Obama administration and also served as the No. 2 administrator at HHS.
Wakefield, 68, started Monday.
—Altering the agency’s organization chart to undo some changes made during the Trump administration.
—Establishing an office of intergovernmental affairs to smooth partnerships with other agencies, as well as a higher-level office on health equity.
Walensky also said she intends to “get rid of some of the reporting layers that exist, and I’d like to work to break down some of the silos.”
She did not say exactly what that may entail, but emphasized that the overall changes are less about redrawing the organization chart than rethinking how the CDC does business and motivates staff.
“This will not be simply moving boxes” on the organization chart, she said.
Schwartz said flaws in the federal response go beyond the CDC, because the White House and other agencies were heavily involved.
A CDC reorganization is a positive step but “I hope it’s not the end of the story,” Schwartz said.
He would like to see “a broader accounting” of how the federal government handles health crises.
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education.
The AP is solely responsible for all content.
This article was featured in One Story to Read Today, a newsletter in which our editors recommend a single must-read from The Atlantic, Monday through Friday.
Sign up for it here.
Before I got long COVID, I tuned out virtually all stories about it.
They were tedious because I was tired of the pandemic, because we are all tired of the pandemic, because it is as familiar as rain and honestly just as dreary; I can hardly believe we once called the coronavirus novel.
Today, I still tune out most long-COVID stories, though for different reasons.
(Busman’s holiday.
I outsource the job to my family.)
But millions of us suffer from long COVID (“the pandemic after the pandemic,” as a Washington Post editorial put it last week), so today I’d like to discuss … etiquette.
That’s right: manners.
I’d like to offer a civilian’s guide to navigating the sensitivities of those furious, frustrated, irritable millions—and to better understanding them.
The fact is, no one—including doctors (especially doctors, dear God, these doctors)—knows the right things to say to those of us who have long COVID, because no one seems to be thinking about this wretched condition in the right way.
Nor does anyone seem to understand the unique psychological suffering associated with this condition.
It’s hideous—arguably worse than some of the very worst of our physical symptoms.
Which, let’s face it, are already pretty grim.
Read: The future of long COVID
Shall we begin?
For starters: Asking “Are you doing any better?” doesn’t help.
One has to think of long COVID as a chronic illness—cause unknown, cure unknown, recovery timetable (assuming there is one) unknown.
I had to explain this early on to my parents.
While I appreciated their frequent texts inquiring about whether I’d seen any improvements, they were a certain recipe for misery.
I wasn’t; I’m not.
I’m on month eight and still declining in many crucial respects.
“How are your symptoms today?” is a far better question.
A related-but-different point: Long COVID symptoms often change.
This syndrome is wily, protean—imagine a mischief of mice moving through the walls of your house and laying waste to different bits of circuitry and infrastructure as they go.
That’s what I’m experiencing.
In the past month, I started developing blood-pressure problems when I stood up.
Good times!
The month before that, I became breathless when I walked.
Why?
No clue.
But now it’s a new feature of my life.
So friends, relations, colleagues, acquaintances: If I have a new symptom, just roll with it, and maybe approach it with curiosity.
Horror or pity—Oh my God, I thought you’d be better by now!—doesn’t help; it just underscores my rotten luck.
Speaking of which: Can we talk depression for a second?
It’s overwhelming, what I’m experiencing.
Ghastly.
Some of it is probably biologically driven, caused by COVID itself—something I should have realized, in hindsight, at week three, when I was curled in the fetal position, bawling uncontrollably.
(It was far too early for me to be despairing about my COVID symptoms.
An MRI at week eight would reveal lingering brain inflammation, a potential marker of depression.)
But some of my misery is the realization that everyone else is leading their lives and I’m not, and I don’t know if I ever will again.
Can we also talk shame and resentment for a second?
Those are overwhelming too.
Speaking only for myself here, I feel like this was a worldwide test that I and I alone among my cohort managed to fail.
Pretty much everyone I know got the Omicron variant of COVID and beat it in a matter of days or weeks; I didn’t.
When I learned that Joe Biden quickly got over his own case of Omicron, I burst into tears.
How did an octogenarian manage to do that while I’ve been suffering for seven and a half months?
I’m not proud of this.
A corollary: I find myself filtering a lot less of what I say these days, because this state of awfulness may be how I spend the rest of my life.
I’ve become Bill Murray in the bathtub in Groundhog Day, that toaster nestled under his arm.
Here’s an anecdote my healthier, more circumspect self would have once filtered, rather than coyly starting a game of guess-who, but whyever not, I’ll share it: A few months ago, I told a higher-up at The New York Times—we’re talking very high altitude—that I’d been struggling with long COVID.
His reply: “Is that the excuse everyone at The Atlantic uses when they’re unproductive?”
It was a staggeringly insensitive thing to say.
Even now, I find myself staring into space, wondering if that moment was real.
(It was.)
Read: Trying to stop long COVID before it even starts
In case you’re wondering how I’m spending my days: in bed, often.
I write from there, like Proust (except that I don’t write like Proust).
Or I’m going to doctors.
That’s your job if you have long COVID, seeing doctors.
If your vestibular system is out of whack, you see a series of ENTs, then neurologists.
If your heart is galloping along or doing weird things, you see a cardiologist.
If you can’t breathe, you get chest X-rays, see a pulmonologist.
You do rehab.
You try to exercise a little, because you know you’re supposed to, but who are we kidding, it’s awful just trying.
You try all kinds of alternative treatments (massage, acupuncture, supplements by the fistful in my case) and spend lots of time politely listening to people tell you about their favorite naturopaths.
You get MRIs and CT scans and sonograms, and still no one knows a goddamn thing.
What’s sometimes confusing to people is that I can pass for well.
But what it takes for me to seem like my usual self if I meet a friend for a cup of tea, at, say, 4 p.m.: 15 milligrams of meloxicam (an anti-inflammatory), 600 milligrams of gabapentin (a pain blocker), and 0.5 milligrams of klonopin (a vestibular suppressant).
Also, an industrial-strength antidepressant.
Also also, two blood-pressure stabilizers.
Then I’m Humpty Dumptied enough to socialize.
Steroids work, too, but they’re bad for you in the long term and turn me into an irritable shrew.
Moving on: Don’t ask what it’s like to have long COVID, at least not with the naked prurience that one professional acquaintance of mine recently did when I made the mistake of briefly dropping in on a colleague’s book party.
She cornered me and wouldn’t stop with her Gatling-gun questions, even when I told her the room was too loud and speaking hurt my head.
“Just one more thing,” she kept saying.
“No more things,” I said as I backed toward the door.
But in the interest of time and efficiency—“see my piece in The Atlantic,” I’ll say from now on—herein I give you a condensed version of what long COVID has been like for me:
The COVID was the easiest part.
I was practically asymptomatic.
I walked the dog, drove four hours in the car, hiked the beach, canoed.
This was in late June.
The doctors in my life should have understood that this spooky absence of symptoms was an ominous sign—my immune-compromised self wasn’t putting up a fight when it should have.
Instead, they all brushed off my concerns when I rang.
To a person, they steered me away from Paxlovid.
Remember that crazy national moment when doctors were being weird about Paxlovid?
And were really down on it?
I got COVID in that brief window.
I cannot tell you how often I go back to that moment and take Paxlovid.
It’s the world’s most unproductive form of magical thinking, trying to undetonate this bomb.
And yet I do.
Anyway, around day 10, things went south.
I was suddenly dizzy every moment of the day.
The world looked like The Blair Witch Project, always bouncing.
It bounced when I chewed.
Then came the tinnitus, the ear fullness.
Ménière’s disease seemed likely.
Google Ménière’s disease.
It’s very challenging.
I have nothing but compassion for those who have it.
Many elaborate tests later, I turned out not to have it.
The nature of my dizziness changed, feeling more like a gyroscope was spinning in my head, or like I was being pulled slantwise by magnetic raindrops, every damn second.
Then came the whale of all symptoms:
My head started to vibrate, painfully, every time I walked or talked.
Read: Long COVID has forced a reckoning for one of medicine’s most neglected diseases
People have asked me a lot about this.
I really don’t know how else to explain it.
I mean, imagine a tuning fork inside your brain.
Every time I take a step, I feel it in my skull.
Ditto when I speak.
My latest combo of meds blunts most of the pain that comes with it.
But the vibrating remains, and it’s driving me mad.
I’m waiting on my insurance company to approve Botox injections to my skull.
(Oh, the irony of being a 53-year-old woman praying for Botox in a place where it will have no visible aesthetic benefit.)
Then my standing heart rate got too fast.
(Now it’s fine.)
Then my blood pressure spiked when I stood, plus other forms of autonomic dysregulation.
My eyeballs spin freely in their sockets for the first 20 minutes of each morning, for instance.
Then my chest started to ache.
Maybe from the blood-pressure spikes, maybe something else.
And I’m short of breath now when I walk, as I said.
You see the problem, right?
My aching chest, my breathlessness—it all means more doctors.
And I am really, really sick of doctors.
Most of them know nothing, and if they can’t help you, they have little time for you.
Many of them dramatically underestimate quality of life as an issue.
The shape-shifting nature of long-COVID symptoms also makes our medical system ill-suited to deal with long COVID.
(Actually, it’s ill-suited for a thousand reasons.
But this is one.)
Telling your long-COVID story in 15 minutes, which is what most doctors have for you, is not possible.
You develop shorthand.
You resort to metaphors.
Both are problems.
One doctor asked if I thought there was an actual gyroscope in my head, for instance.
“Uh, this is a vestibular problem I’m describing,” I said, “not a psychiatric one.”
Asshole.
The worst part?
Because no one understands what causes long COVID, even the best doctors can only treat your symptoms separately.
My blood pressure gets two medications.
My vibrating head gets a third.
My vestibular symptoms get a fourth.
My pain gets a fifth.
Inflammation gets a sixth.
The microclots I may or may not have, which may or may not cause long COVID, require three different supplements, which may or may not work.
This said, the long-COVID team at New York’s Mount Sinai Hospital at least thinks holistically, even if they don’t know what lurks at the heart of my problems.
I feel lucky to be under their care (plus two dogged and creative immunologists at Columbia Presbyterian).
I cannot imagine what it’s like for the millions of Americans who don’t have access to the minds and resources I do.
If you encounter them, remember that they are suffering.
Remember that they don’t want to be pitied.
Remember that they’ve each developed their own idiosyncratic strategies to cope, and that they don’t need to be told to do more or to do less or to approach things differently.
Be gentle.
Disease eventually ensnares all of us; when it happens to you, you’ll crave the same.
For some individuals, symptoms of COVID-19 can persist beyond two months after initial infection.
Yet even though long COVID has become prevalent, still little is known about this condition.
But recent research has shown long COVID can impact an individual’s ability to work, leading to higher rates of unemployment and financial hardship.
Knowing how to help patients who are unemployed and struggling with long COVID symptoms is key.
Half the dues, all the AMA benefits!
AMA membership offers unique access to savings and resources tailored to enrich the personal and professional lives of physicians, residents and medical students.
Learn More
Published in JAMA Network Open, the study “Association of Post–COVID-19 Condition Symptoms and Employment Status” used data from eight waves of a 50-state U.S. nonprobability internet and population-based survey of respondents between the ages of 18 and 69 conducted from February 2021 to July 2022.
Out of 15,308 survey respondents with test-confirmed COVID-19 at least two months prior, 14.6% reported long COVID symptoms.
This included 45.9% reporting either brain fog or impaired memory.
Of those with long COVID, 12.3% reported being unemployed compared to 8.7% without symptoms.
Among those with long COVID symptoms, 45.5% worked full-time compared to 55.2% who did not report having this condition.
This shows that long COVID was associated with a lower likelihood of working full-time and a higher likelihood of being unemployed.
“Unfortunately, we are so eager as a country to move on from COVID that we tend to forget how many people still have persistent symptoms.
And even if you acknowledge that people may still be ill, there’s a tendency to minimize these symptoms,” said Roy H. Perlis, MD, MSc, the study’s lead author and director of the Center for Quantitative Health at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
Dr. Perlis is also a professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and associate editor of JAMA Network Open.
“Even when you account for sociodemographic differences, if you have long COVID, you’re substantially less likely to be working full-time, you are substantially more likely to be unemployed.
Those are important numbers to get out there,” Dr. Perlis said.
Also, “we looked specifically at the effect of having cognitive symptoms—either brain fog or memory impairment—and found that if you have long COVID, that was associated with a greater risk of functional impairment.”
Related Coverage Long COVID and the brain: Neurological symptoms may persist
“We just can’t lose sight of how many people are out there who are still impacted by COVID,” Dr. Perlis added.
Here is what physicians should keep in mind.
Pay attention to functioning Pay attention to functioning
Physicians are “very good at characterizing symptoms … but in the end it’s this aggregate burden of those symptoms that is what patients care about, so physicians should ask about functioning,” Dr. Perlis said.
“It’s not just asking if a patient has brain fog, but asking if it is keeping them from doing things.”
That can help “make that link between the symptom and the function,” he said.
“Physicians do learn to do this, but this paper to me is a reminder of the importance of linking symptoms to functioning.”
Inquire about prior COVID-19 infection Inquire about prior COVID-19 infection
“The other thing is that people may not volunteer these symptoms because they may not recognize that these are long COVID symptoms,” Dr. Perlis said, noting “I’m still struck in my clinical practice by how many people don’t necessarily make a connection between having had that illness and persistent fatigue, brain fog and problems with balance or dizziness.”
“To those of us in health care, we might make that connection very quickly.
Not everyone does,” he said.
“So just making sure that when we see people with these kinds of symptoms, we ask about prior COVID and whether those symptoms might have persisted is still important.”
Related Coverage
For patients with long COVID, look out for psychiatric sequelae
Ask about long COVID brain symptoms Ask about long COVID brain symptoms
“Sometimes in primary care settings, it’s easy to focus more on things like shortness of breath or fatigue,” Dr. Perlis said.
But “it’s really important to ask about both cognitive and psychiatric symptoms.”
“We know that for a lot of people with long COVID, depression and anxiety can be prominent,” which is why it is important to ensure “physicians don’t forget to ask about brain symptoms in long COVID,” he said.
“Long COVID absolutely can involve the brain and what this paper suggests is that some of those brain symptoms have real impact on functioning.”
Multiple COVID-19 vaccines are available throughout the US.
As of May 2022, anyone over the age of 5 is eligible for one of three FDA-approved COVID-19 vaccines and a booster shot for further immunity against COVID-19 variants.
The goal is to have at least 70% of every country fully vaccinated by mid-2022, per the World Health Organization (WHO).
But whether you're considering a booster or still hesitant about getting the vaccine, it's normal to have questions about the process.
To help, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has released guidance on what people can expect before, during, and after the vaccination process.
Here's what you need to know if you want to be prepared for your appointment.
First, Some COVID-19 Vaccine Basics
The Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna COVID-19 vaccines use messenger RNA (mRNA) to build protection from the virus.
The mRNA vaccines work by encoding a part of the spike protein found on the surface of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention explains.
The vaccine uses pieces of the encoded protein to spark an immune response in your body.
That, in turn, causes your body to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, which should help you fight off the infection in the future.
Afterward, your body eliminates the protein and the mRNA, while the antibodies stick around to help provide immunity.
The Johnson & Johnson shot uses a viral vector—a more traditional vaccine method.
A viral vector vaccine uses a weak and harmless virus that is not SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19) to enter muscle cells and create part of the spike protein.
Like mRNA vaccines, the production of the spike protein triggers your immune cells to identify the foreign object, destroy it, and keep watch for any similar-looking invaders in the future.
What Should You Do Before You Get the COVID-19 Vaccine?
First, check your COVID-19 vaccine eligibility.
While all adults are eligible for the COVID-19 vaccine and booster, as of May 2022, the CDC recommends a booster shot only for children older than 5 years old.
Additionally, the CDC prefers people choose an mRNA booster over a Johnson & Johnson booster to avoid severe side effects.
You may want to consider the Johnson & Johnson vaccine if you have a severe allergy to an ingredient in any of the mRNA vaccines or if there is limited access to other choices.
The CDC advises getting your booster five months after your second mRNA dose.
People who originally chose the Johnson & Johnson shot show get their booster two months after.
Then, the CDC recommends learning more about how the COVID-19 vaccine works and the benefits of getting vaccinated.
Those benefits include helping to keep you from getting a COVID-19 infection, reducing the risk of reinfection, and providing a safer way to build protection against the virus.
While there's no official guidance on this, it's not a bad idea to take it easy the night before.
"You don't want to do a bunch of shots and then be hungover," said infectious disease expert Amesh A. Adalja, MD, assistant professor-adjunct at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
His biggest concern: If you feel crappy, you may blame it on the vaccine instead of your hangover.
Also, there is a chance that the COVID-19 vaccine could cause some flu-like side effects, and you don't want to deal with that on top of already feeling crummy.
Try to drink water the night before and get a good night's sleep to prepare for the day.
Another thing you don't want to do is to take antihistamines, acetaminophen, aspirin, or ibuprofen to prevent vaccine side effects.
The CDC recommends against it.
And that's because, as of May 2022, research on the connection is just too limited and inconsistent.
It's still unclear how taking pain relievers before your vaccine to prevent post-vaccination symptoms like soreness and fever affects your body's response to the vaccine.
"We don't think it would impair your immune response, but we don't want to take any chances," William Schaffner, MD, an infectious disease specialist and professor at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, told Health.
If you are regularly taking the above medications for other medical reasons, the CDC says you should keep taking them.
However, it's always a good idea to check with your healthcare provider and get a personalized recommendation for your specific treatment plan.
Overall, Dr. Adalja recommended following this advice: "Just do what you would normally do, within reason.
"
What Happens When You Get the COVID-19 Vaccine?
COVID-19 vaccines are available in clinics, and pharmacies, among other places.
You can use the government-funded VaccineFinder to find nearby locations administering vaccines as well as the site's website, phone number, and hours of operation.
The VaccineFinder also has a COVID-19 Vaccine Hotline available for people who speak a second language other than English and a Disability Information and Access Line for people with disabilities who need support scheduling an appointment.
Alternatively, you can text your zip code to 438829 to find vaccine sites in your area.
When you show up for your appointment to get vaccinated, check with the COVID-19 testing site on whether they still require a mask or social distancing.
If they do, use a well-fitted face mask—covering your mouth and nose—and stay at least six feet away from others (until, of course, it's time to be vaccinated).
"The actual vaccination process will be similar to how it's been when you've gotten a flu shot or most other vaccines", John Sellick, D.O., an infectious disease expert and professor of medicine at the University at Buffalo/SUNY in New York, told Health.
Meaning, they will sterilize a spot on your upper arm with rubbing alcohol or something similar, and you'll receive your injection.
"You will be asked to wait around for 15 minutes or so to make sure you don't have a reaction", said Dr. Schaffner.
This is technically also a recommendation with the flu shot, but many places don't enforce it, said Dr. Schaffner, adding "I think this will be observed with the COVID-19 vaccine, just to be safe."
If you have a history of anaphylaxis, a severe and life-threatening allergic reaction, you may have to wait for 30 minutes to ensure there are no issues.
You should receive a vaccination card or printout that tells you what COVID-19 vaccine you received, the date you received it, and where you received it.
You may also receive a paper or electronic version of a fact sheet that tells you more about the specific COVID-19 vaccine you are being offered.
"After that, you can go about your merry way," said Dr. Sellick.
What Can You Expect After You Get the COVID-19 Vaccine?
As of May 2022, the CDC considers a person fully vaccinated against COVID-19 two weeks after their second dose.
Depending on your vaccine, your second dose may be scheduled three to eight weeks after the first.
While you should not get your second dose sooner than that, if you miss the window, you can still get vaccinated without having to restart the series.
After vaccination (especially after the second dose), you may experience some side effects.
These are the most common side effects of the COVID-19 vaccine, per the CDC:
Pain at the injection site
Redness or swelling in the arm where you got your shot
Fever
Chills
Tiredness
Headache
Nausea
Muscle pain all over the body
If you have arm soreness or swelling, the CDC recommends holding a clean, cool, wet washcloth over the area, and using or exercising your arm.
If you have a fever, the CDC suggests drinking plenty of fluids and dressing lightly.
And, if you have pain or discomfort, the CDC says it's a good idea to talk to your doctor about taking an over-the-counter medicine like ibuprofen or acetaminophen.
Side effects are a sign that your body is building protection against the virus.
COVID-19 vaccine side effects can occur in the first 6 weeks.
"But most side effects—if you even experience them—should go away after the first day or two", said Dr. Schaffner.
Still, the CDC recommends calling your healthcare provider if the redness or tenderness where you got the shot increases after 24 hours or if your side effects are worrying you or don't seem to go away after a few days.
Even with two shots, the CDC says it can take a "few weeks" to build up immunity to COVID-19.
Your booster shot can take about two weeks to kick in.
"With more severe or contagious COVID-19 variants emerging, it's still important to wear a mask in public and follow other methods of preventing the spread of COVID-19," said Dr. Adalja.
The vaccines won't give you complete immunity against the virus, but it gives you a much lower chance of getting infected.
And, if by chance you are exposed to the virus, research shows you are less likely to have a severe illness or need to be hospitalized if you are vaccinated and boosted.
"Keep following recommendations until public health officials advise otherwise," advised Dr. Adalja.
The information in this story is accurate as of press time.
However, as the situation surrounding COVID-19 continues to evolve, it's possible that some data have changed since publication.
While Health is trying to keep our stories as up-to-date as possible, we also encourage readers to stay informed on news and recommendations for their own communities by using the CDC, WHO, and their local public health department as resources.
The total cost of the response to Covid-19 in Northern Ireland was £7.79bn, the Northern Ireland Audit Office has estimated.
Spending by Stormont departments was estimated at £4.94bn, with £2.85bn relating to the costs of UK-wide schemes.
The furlough scheme was estimated to have cost £1.72bn in Northern Ireland.
Furlough involved the government helping to pay the wages of people who could not work due to the pandemic.
The Audit Office is continuing to analyse pandemic-related spending.
Its latest report does not assess the value for money of individual measures.
Auditor General Dorinnia Carville said: "Evaluating the impact of spending, identifying what worked well, or did not work, and building on this insight will help to ensure organisations are well placed to react when faced with other emergencies in the future."
Image: ©Dorte Verner/WorldBank
Along with other countries worldwide, Burkina Faso has been seriously impacted by the COVID-19 that was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO) in March 2020.
As of May 30th, 2022, a total of 20,899 cases were recorded in Burkina Faso.
Unfortunately, many of the cases led to fatalities for a total number of deaths of 384 (1.8% of the cases).
In Burkina Faso, the COVID-19 pandemic spread out at the peak of an unprecedented internal displacement crisis.
Although the violence was initially triggered by exogenous factors related to regional dynamics, current conflict risks are the result of both the rise in regional violent extremism and deep-rooted structural causes.
In particular, the sharp increase in the number of IDPs over the last three years is mainly attributable to the intensification of Jihadist attacks on civilians and security forces.[1]
For security-related issues, in Burkina Faso forcibly displaced persons (FDPs) are predominantly internally displaced people (IDPs).
According to the Conseil National de Secours d’Urgence et de Réhabilitation (CONASUR) estimates, the number of internally displaced people soared from 87,000 in January 2019 to over 1,7 million in January 2022.
The unprecedented levels of displacement, occurring as the coronavirus pandemic was worsening an already critical humanitarian crisis in the violence-stricken country, called for the urgent need for timely data and analysis to better inform policy and targeting programs.
The Burkina Faso National Institute of Statistics and Demography (INSD), with the financial and technical support from the Joint World Bank – UNHCR Joint Data Center on Forced Displacement (JDC) and the technical assistance from the World Bank’s Poverty and Equity Global Practice and the Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS) program, implemented and disseminated the data and survey briefs for the first two rounds of the High-Frequency Phone Survey (BFA HFPS-IDP).
The BFA HFPS-IDP was designed to assess the socioeconomic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on Internally Displaced People (IDPs) and was conducted in three rounds between May and July 2021 conjointly for IDPs and the rest of the (non-IDP) population in the country, allowing for an assessment of potential differences in the experience of the displaced and non-displaced during the pandemic.
Rounds 1, 2, and 3 of data collection for the HFPS-IDP occurred simultaneously with rounds 9, 10, and 11 of the national HFPS operation, respectively.
The core survey questionnaire of the Burkina Faso High-Frequency Phone Survey on IDPs (BFA HFPS-IDP) was designed to cover important and relevant topics like employment, access to basic services, and staple foods, food security, and non-labor sources of income.
The core questionnaire was complemented by questions on selected topics that rotate each month, including knowledge of COVID-19 spread, social distancing, and behavior, coping mechanisms to shocks, fragility, conflict, and violence.
Selected topics were investigated more in detail in specific rounds.
This note presents selected results from the first two rounds of the BFA HFPS-IDP data (round 3 results will be published soon).
To access the BFA HFPS-IDP microdata and related documentation (questionnaire, technical document, and result briefs), please visit the World Bank’s Microdata Catalog here (microdata for the non-displaced population can be found here).
Food insecurity is particularly pronounced among IDPs—internally displaced households are nearly 50 percentage points more likely to be moderately or severely food insecure than the general Burkinabe population (May 2021 round).
Combining households who are moderately food insecure and those severely food insecure makes it clear that food insecurity is more prevalent in rural areas for IDP and non-displaced households.
Figure 1: Food Insecurity Experience Scale
Employment outcome disparities are only slightly less vast (May 2021 round).
In the week preceding data collection, eight in ten non-displaced respondents were employed, yet only five in ten IDP respondents were working over the same period.
The employment rate is slightly higher (although not significant) for out-of-camp IDPs (53.2%) than for camped IDPs (48.5%).
Figure 2: Employment status of respondents (last 7 days)
The economic slowdown due to COVID-19 has translated into an economy-wide reduction in income.
Across all subgroups, most respondents reported falling incomes over the last year.
While more than three in five Burkinabe households (61.9%) saw their incomes decrease, four in five (83.1%) displaced Burkinabe reported an income drop (May 2021 round).
Figure 3: Income change compared to April 2020
Displaced households have very different income source profiles from the general population.
Non-displaced households get their income mainly from non-farm enterprises (37.6%), and farm activities (26.1%) (May 2021 round).
On the other hand, most IDPs (57.1%) receive family and non-family assistance—including remittances from abroad; income from non-farm enterprises is the most frequent source of labor income (24.4%).
IDPs living in camp are highly reliant on family and non-family assistance (including remittances from abroad), while those living out of a camp are more likely to engage in non-farm business.
Figure 4: Households' main income sources
When schools reopened in October 2020, nearly one-third of IDP households did not send all of their children back to school by June 2021.
This was far higher than the national average of 10% of households who did not have all their children return to school (June 2021 round).
Figure 5: Households that sent their children to school after school reopening
During the pandemic and displacement crises, access to financial services has been severely limited for both IDPs and the Burkina population generally.
Over the survey period, informal sources such as friends and relatives were virtually the only source of credit for IDP households (not shown), and displaced households borrowed mainly to purchase food products (68%) (June 2021 round).
Figure 6: Main reason for borrowing financial resources
IDP households coped with shocks in very different ways than the general Burkinabe population.
Nationally, most households reported that they rely on savings, selling assets, or friends for help.
Displaced Burkinabe households rely on friends, too, but primarily look to government and non-government organizations, suggesting that the displaced may have already lost savings and assets (June 2021 round).
Figure 7: Households’ coping strategies to shocks adopted in the previous 2 months
The members of the team working on the BFA HFPS-IDP are Marco Tiberti, Clarence Tsimpo Nkengne, and Marco Costantini from the World Bank, Harriet Mugera and Jeff Tanner from the WB-UNHCR Joint Data Center on Forced Displacement (JDC) and Zakaria Koncobo from the Institut National de la Statistique et la Demographie (INSD).
The team benefitted from the comments by Maja Lazic (UNHCR).
The briefs were prepared with guidance from Bjorn Erik Gillsater (JDC), Johan A. Mistiaen (World Bank), Boureima Ouedraogo, and Jean Edouard Odilon Doamba (INSD).
The team acknowledges the essential support of CONASUR in providing the sampling frame.
We engaged with national and subnational data custodians to standardize and analyse aggregate-level data on monthly numbers of births stratified by gestational age from population-based data sources, and to conduct exploratory analyses using non-population-based data sources.
Detailed time-series data enabled us to use pre-lockdown trends in preterm birth and stillbirth rates to forecast the expected trend in these outcomes had lockdown not occurred, and compare these forecasted rates with the observed rates for each country individually and combined across countries in a meta-analysis.
The study was conducted using a common protocol55 and reported according to the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) guideline56.
Ethical considerations
Contributors from countries where the data were not publicly available obtained ethics approval from their respective institutional review boards (Supplementary Table 6).
We did not seek ethical approval for publicly available data sources (Supplementary Table 6).
All data contributors completed a Data Contribution Agreement, which outlined the terms and conditions for uploading and storing data to the SAIL Databank57.
Study data and population
We collected aggregate data from 26 countries (Supplementary Table 1).
We considered data sources as population-based if they captured more than 90% of births in the region or country, and non-population-based if coverage was ≤90%.
There were 18 national and regional population-based data sources that, where possible, included all recorded births from 22 + 0 weeks gestation between January 2015 and July 2020.
Births recorded as ≥45 + 0 weeks gestation were censored as unfeasible gestation of birth.
Data were also included in the analyses if they were available for a shorter pre-pandemic period (Denmark, Iran and Peru), for live births only (Chile, Peru and the United States), or used a slightly different cut-off for the lower limit of gestational age (≥24 + 0 weeks gestation in New South Wales, Australia and Wales, UK).
Data available from low- and lower-middle-income country settings were exclusively non-population-based, and we therefore included non-population-based data as part of the main analysis in a deviation from the original protocol55, to provide insights across a range of countries by income levels.
There were 26 non-population-based data sources from ten countries, which included data from individual health facilities (23 datasets from seven countries), pooled data from a group of health facilities (two datasets from two countries) and demographic surveillance sites (one dataset from one country)
(Supplementary Table 1).
For Australia and the United States, there were both population-based and non-population-based data sources included in the analysis; the data sources from Australia covered different regions of the country whereas data sources for the United States covered some overlapping regions but were not included together in any analysis (as described below).
To ensure data and measures from different settings were comparable, consistent and coherent, we developed a detailed protocol, including standardized outcome definitions and data collection templates55, and stored and analysed the standardized data in the Secure Anonymized Information Linkage (SAIL) Databank.
We collected information on national income levels from the World Bank58 (Supplementary Table 1).
In our study protocol55, we proposed to additionally collect national-level data on air pollution, adherence to lockdown, COVID-19 rates, world region and parental leave policy; we did not ultimately include these data due to (1) not being able to identify readily available reliable data for all our study settings (air pollution and adherence to lockdown) or (2) finding little or no variation between the included datasets beyond that captured by country-income level (COVID-19 rates, world region and parental leave policy).
Defining lockdown
For each country, we defined the start of lockdown using the Oxford Stringency Index38.
In brief, this index collects information on different social, health and economic government policies instituted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We considered the onset of a country’s initial lockdown as the date at which the stringency score first exceeded 50 on the Oxford Stringency Index (range 0–100).
This cut-off was pre-specified in the study protocol and based on expert advice.
For dates of lockdown that occurred between the 1st and 15th of the month, the first month of lockdown was assigned to that month; for dates after the 15th, the first month of lockdown was assigned to the following month.
As described below, we explored the impact on perinatal outcomes in the first four months from a country’s initial lockdown, regardless of whether the Oxford Stringency Index dropped below 50 during this time.
We restricted the analysis to the first four months to facilitate comparison between different countries included in this study; this was when the strictest lockdowns were in place in response to the first wave of COVID-19, with increasing variability between countries beyond this timeframe.
Defining perinatal outcomes
Data contributors recorded monthly numbers of births categorized into pre-specified gestational age groups, according to our data collection template.
The outcome definitions aligned with global standard definitions for preterm birth and stillbirth59,60 and were developed in consultation with our international collaborators to ensure that all data contributors captured these outcomes consistently.
For each month, we calculated the preterm birth rate per 100 births, as the number of births from 22 + 0 to 36 + 6 weeks gestation divided by the total number of births61.
We calculated the very preterm birth rate per 100 births as the number of births from 22
+ 0 to 31 + 6 weeks gestation divided by the total number of births.
We estimated the spontaneous preterm birth rate per 100 births as the number of births from 22
+ 0 to 36 + 6 weeks gestation with spontaneous onset divided by the total number of births.
The preterm, very preterm and spontaneous preterm birth rates were calculated, where available, using all births and live births only for settings where data on stillbirths were not available.
We were not prescriptive in how data contributors should identify and define spontaneous births, beyond specifying that these should capture births preceded by spontaneous contractions or preterm prelabour rupture of membranes.
Further details of the methods used to estimate gestational age across the different datasets are provided in Supplementary Table 1.
The stillbirth rate was expressed per 1,000 births and calculated by dividing the number of stillbirths occurring from ≥22 + 0 weeks gestation by the total number of births.
Data analysis
A detailed description of the steps to clean and prepare the data before undertaking the analysis is provided in Supplementary Methods.
In brief, we evaluated data quality and completeness of each dataset by: (1) assessing data completeness, including calculating the percentage of births missing gestational age; (2) examining for outliers in perinatal outcome rates; and (3) assessing whether there was any evidence for a change in the documented number of births after lockdown which, given the early stage of the pandemic when fertility will not have been affected, would suggest that women were giving birth in different locations or there were changes in recording practices (further details on analytical procedures in Supplementary Methods).
Any population-based datasets where there was a relative change of a 10% or more increase or decrease in the number of observed compared with expected total births following lockdown were excluded from the population-based analysis, and analysed as a non-population-based dataset.
For each country-specific population-based dataset, we undertook an ITS analysis62 to model the effect of lockdown on perinatal outcomes.
First, we fitted weighted ITS models on the entire time series of the monthly log(odds) of the outcomes.
Weights were based on the total number of births per month; imputed values for missing data (Supplementary Methods) were down-weighted to one (minimum possible number of births) to reduce bias from missing observations.
Models accounted for seasonality (with inclusion of month as a fixed effect) and long-term temporal trends, and we allowed the within-period trend and intercept to be different for the pre-lockdown and lockdown periods.
Given that countries could have different trends in perinatal outcomes, we fitted five different potential models for each outcome for each country evaluating the trend as a linear, square, quadratic, logarithmic and second-order polynomial effect.
The model with the lowest Akaike Information Criterion was chosen as the best fit model63.
We assessed the goodness of fit of the best model by examining the standardized residuals.
Second, to compare the forecast of the best fit model to the post-lockdown observed values, we refitted the model to the pre-lockdown observations using the same trend effect selected through the Akaike Information Criterion.
This ‘pre-lockdown model’ was then used to forecast the expected rates of the perinatal outcomes for each of the first four months of lockdown assuming lockdown had not occurred.
Plots of the observed and forecasted rates were used to visualize trends in outcomes over time.
We calculated the OR between the observed odds and the forecast odds of each perinatal outcome for each of the first four months of lockdown, a time period chosen to capture when lockdowns in response to the first wave of COVID-19 were implemented.
We specified a priori to analyse each of the first four months of lockdown separately, as we hypothesized that the association between lockdown and perinatal outcomes would vary by month of lockdown given how rapidly public health measures evolved during this time.
To analyse the non-population-based data, we used a linear regression model (rather than an ITS model) to forecast the log(odds) of perinatal outcomes in the first to fourth month of lockdown assuming lockdown had not occurred.
This was due to non-population based datasets varying in data availability with respect to the pre-lockdown study period, frequency of reporting of outcomes, and degree of missingness.
To capture changes by season and annual trends pre-lockdown in our forecasted estimates, the model included month (categorical) and year (continuous), with year also included as a squared term to account for settings with non-linear changes in the perinatal outcome rates over time.
We then calculated the OR quantifying the impact of lockdown on the perinatal outcomes by dividing the observed odds of each perinatal outcome by the forecasted odds for each of the first four months of lockdown.
The ORs from each dataset for each perinatal outcome at each month after lockdown were pooled using random-effects meta-analysis64, and this was done separately for the population-based data and the non-population-based data.
For the population-based data, we stratified the meta-analysis by country income level (where sufficient datasets for each category permitted): high income versus upper-middle income.
For non-population-based data, we used a three-level meta-analysis model to account for the dependency of observations of the impact of lockdown between facilities in the same country65.
The I2 statistic, which captures the percentage of the variability in the ORs between countries that is due to heterogeneity rather than sampling error, was used to assess for evidence of between-country heterogeneity in the ORs66.
We did not conduct equivalence tests to assess whether there was evidence that there was no association between the pandemic and our outcomes, as these tests require identifying a minimum clinically significant difference below which we would conclude that there was no change in our outcomes.
There is no clear clinically significant difference that can be used for preterm birth or stillbirth, with any increase being of concern.
Where relevant, we report P values for the probability of observing a relative difference in our outcomes at least as big as that in our data under the assumption that there was no association between the pandemic and our outcomes.
All analyses were performed in R version 4.1.1.
Sensitivity analyses
We conducted three sensitivity analyses.
First, to assess the potential impact of including datasets that only provided data on preterm birth among live births (rather than all births, 3/18 datasets) in the main analysis, we conducted ITS analysis restricted to live births among datasets which also provided data on all births (n = 15 datasets).
Second, to evaluate the impact of including datasets with a different lower limit for gestational age in the main population-based analysis for preterm birth, we restricted the time-series analysis to births from 28 weeks gestational age onwards, the lower threshold recommended by the World Health Organization for international comparisons60.
Third, we also conducted a sensitivity analysis for our meta-analysis of the association between lockdown and preterm birth among all population-based datasets, excluding Brazil and the United States, which together contributed slightly over 70% of the births included in the study.
Public and patient involvement
Parent representatives from four national patient partner organizations were included from the inception of the iPOP study to inform the common goal of timely implementation of quality research.
We used mechanisms to ensure meaningful collaboration through inclusion on meeting agendas and facilitating meeting processes so that everyone had an equal voice to ensure patient partners were treated with mutual respect.
Patient partners from Brazil, Canada, Hungary and Ireland co-developed the iPOP protocol, attended all iPOP meetings to ensure meaningful collaboration, edited and provided input to this manuscript, and are continuing to co-build meaningful and innovative knowledge translation strategies.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Frustrated by a lack of results from Western medicine, some long Covid patients have turned to Eastern alternatives.
Many say acupuncture, in particular, has provided relief.
Lauren Nichols, a Massachusetts resident who got Covid in March 2020, estimated that over two years she had tried around 30 different pharmaceuticals to ease her migraines, brain fog, fatigue, seizures, diarrhea and other lasting symptoms.
Eventually her physical limitations — and a lack of answers — became so overwhelming that she developed suicidal thoughts.
Courtesy of Lauren Nichols
"I was very close to not being in this world," she said.
But about three months after she started acupuncture in May 2022, Nichols said, “I could see the clouds starting to part.
"Instead of having migraines about four to six times a day at its worst, I was having migraines about two times a day.
And then eventually, one time a day," she said.
Now, Nichols said, the migraines and most other symptoms have resolved themselves, thanks to a combination of alternative therapies.
As of February, about 11% of U.S. adults who’d ever had Covid were experiencing long Covid, according to data from a household survey conducted by the Census Bureau.
Long Covid is generally defined as having symptoms that last at least three months after a coronavirus infection.
There is no standard treatment, so doctors often prescribe medications based on an individual's symptoms.
Some long Covid patients take steroids, while others use antiviral drugs or medications designed to treat seizures, high blood pressure or muscle weakness.
Doctors readily acknowledge that it's a trial-and-error process, and not all patients find relief.
"There has been an unfortunate pattern of [long Covid] patients going to doctors and not feeling that they’re getting what they need, or feeling like they’re trying all these medicines and it’s not getting them the result that they want,” said Dr. Meenakshi "Cosmos" Kumar, a family medicine specialist at Beth Israel Lahey Health Primary Care — The Marino Center for Integrated Health.
Kumar, who treats Nichols, said they often suggest acupuncture to long Covid patients, even though there isn't clinical data to support that particular use.
Some research is underway, however.
A clinical study in the U.K. is giving people with long Covid weekly 15-minute acupuncture treatments for six weeks, and those in a control group "semi-structured" phone consultations with a clinician.
Dr. Imogen Locke, a clinical oncologist at the Royal Marsden Hospital in London, is spearheading the study and said she doesn't expect full results until 2025.
But anecdotally, Locke said, the participants receiving acupuncture so far "do seem to be responding.
"
"Obviously, we have to wait for when the data is unlocked," she said.
Studying acupuncture's effects is challenging
Elizabeth Joyce, a therapeutic radiographer at the Royal Marsden Hospital, said she entered Locke’s trial after nearly two years of long Covid.
"I just had this awful muscle fatigue, as if I'd run like four marathons in a day," she said.
After receiving three weeks of acupuncture through the trial, Joyce said she felt energized enough to go for a run.
She continued acupuncture on her own after the trial, and her muscle fatigue is nearly resolved, she said.
Locke noted, however, that studies like hers come with challenges.
Although some research has found that acupuncture could help reduce chronic pain, fatigue or inflammation, people receiving a placebo in such studies know that needles are not piercing their skin.
“Is there a good, robust evidence base for acupuncture?
The answer is probably no, because of the difficulties and methodological challenges of doing acupuncture studies,” Locke said.
Some doctors worry that overall, the lack of long Covid treatments makes patients vulnerable to predatory providers.
“Many people are preying on their desperation by offering them strategies that haven’t really been fully tested and in some cases can be dangerous and expensive,” said Dr. Harlan Krumholz, a cardiologist and scientist at Yale University.
Krumholz said it’s not clear why some patients seem to respond to Eastern therapies.
“They may be getting benefit because of a placebo effect.
But honestly, at this stage, if it makes them feel better, it’s still making them feel better,” he said.
Occasionally, though, there can be harmful side effects to alternative therapies, according to Michelle Haddad, who runs a post-Covid neuropsychology clinic at Emory Rehabilitation Hospital.
“A lot of times people think, ‘Oh, it’s herbs,’ or ‘Oh, it’s a nutrient.
It can’t be harmful to me,’ and it can.
It’s very important that people keep their providers informed,” she said.
Many long Covid patients swear by acupuncture
Rachel Villalobos, who lives in Seaside, California, decided to try acupuncture last fall after contending with high blood pressure, headaches, dizziness, chest pain, heart palpitations and dark spots in her vision — the effects of a Covid infection in January 2022.
Villalobos gave birth to her daughter while testing positive for Covid, then went to the emergency room several months later after fainting at a friend’s barbecue.
A doctor eventually diagnosed her with postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, or POTS, a nervous system disorder that makes it difficult to remain upright.
Courtesy of Rachel Villalobos
“I would just pass out,” Villalobos said.
“I couldn’t stand up.
I couldn’t walk up our steps in our house because I would just fall over.
For a while, I couldn’t even hold my head up.”
Villalobos said she took blood pressure medication, a steroid, over-the-counter painkillers and Benadryl.
But with acupuncture, she said, "everything seemed to just kind of calm down."
Her heart palpitations have stopped, she said.
Christine Kaiser, the clinical manager of acupuncture and quality at University Hospitals Connor Whole Health in Ohio, estimated that at least 75% of her long Covid patients had responded well to acupuncture, even though many were hesitant about trying it.
“They’re frustrated and I think maybe
a little skeptical — like, they’ve tried so many things, what is this going to do?
But they’re willing to try it,” she said.
Kaiser explained that many long Covid symptoms were similar to those practitioners had addressed with acupuncture before the pandemic.
“Acupuncture reduces inflammation.
It regulates that autonomic nervous system, helps to increase blood flow, helps to release neurochemicals in the brain,” she said.
A combination of approaches
Long Covid patients usually undertake acupuncture in concert with other interventions, such as medications or supplements.
Villalobos takes, among other things, ashwagandha, an herb used in traditional Indian medicine.
Nichols undergoes intravenous ozone therapy and ultraviolet blood irradiation, and also takes naltrexone, a drug used to treat opioid use disorder.
Early research suggests it may help temper an overactive immune response.
Alisa Bolling, a retired nurse in Parkland, Florida, said that after bouncing from doctor to doctor looking for long Covid treatments, she now relies on meditation, acupuncture and a supplement that contains boswellia, an herbal extract used in traditional Chinese, Middle Eastern and Indian medicine.
“It sounds crazy, but it works,” Bolling said.
"As a nurse, especially, I exhausted every avenue.”
Kumar said that depending on the patient, a blend of adaptogenic herbs or turmeric might be recommended.
But Eastern medicine can be expensive and often isn’t covered by insurance, which can hinder access.
Kumar said most of Beth Israel Lahey Health's long Covid patients were white women ages 20 to 60.
Specialist visits and prescription drugs can be costly too.
Nichols estimated that she spent $30,000 to $40,000 out-of-pocket before trying acupuncture.
“I would have rather have spent that money on these [alternative] treatments because they actually are for me more curative and more supportive,” she said.
“The Western treatments have been nothing short of a waste of money."
watch now
Michael Bryand, 35, first got Covid in September 2020.
"I never really got better," he said in a sit-down interview with CNBC.
"I had symptoms that stayed with me and that are still with me."
Bryand, who was working at Wells Fargo in San Antonio at the time, went on short-term disability and then long-term disability but was later denied Social Security Disability Insurance, or SSDI.
Although the Biden administration is looking at ending the public health emergency over the next few months, many who get sick but survive Covid suffer from enduring health problems, studies show.
And currently, as many as 23 million Americans have what's considered long Covid, according to recent estimates from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
As many as 4 million people are likely out of work due to the illness, a separate report from the Brookings Institution found.
Long Covid is 'something invisible'
Michael Bryand, here with his family, first got Covid in September 2020.
Source: Michael Bryand
Long Covid can be considered a disability under the Americans with Disabilities Act, or ADA, but getting approved for disability insurance is challenging.
Many have been routinely denied despite being unable to work because they can't get the documentation they need from specialist physicians.
These specialists must provide a diagnosis and a prognosis, which can be hard to determine for some symptoms, like cognitive dysfunction, or for symptoms that change over time, HHS found.
"I've had chest pains," Bryand said.
"I've had fatigue that doesn't go away."
And yet, Bryand's condition is hard to measure and harder to prove.
I'm just trying to manage my symptoms.
Michael Bryand
"That's probably the toughest thing about long Covid — having people believe or understand because it's not like a broken arm where I can show them," he said.
"It's something invisible."
For now, Bryand is on unpaid leave from his current employer, Citibank, although the husband and father of two says it's increasingly hard to make ends meet.
"I don't really have a … life at this point," he said.
"I'm just trying to manage my symptoms.
"
'I don't want to be on disability'
Jennifer Ramey, 49, hasn't been able to go back to work either.
Ramey was a nurse in San Antonio for 30 years before she got Covid in 2020.
After her initial symptoms, she developed a rare condition called autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.
"I don't want to be on disability," she said.
"I would give anything if I could have a day in the life of working as who I was before."
And yet, Ramey suffers from brain fog, anxiety and extreme fatigue.
After work, "I'd just pull over at a gas station or Walgreens and sleep in my car for an hour just so I could make it home," she said.
"And it was seven miles.
"
Jennifer Ramey was a nurse and a marathoner before she got Covid.
Source: Jennifer Ramey
Ramey was also denied SSDI.
Dr. Monica Verduzco-Gutierrez, professor and chair of the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine at the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio, called Ramey's denial for disability benefits "mind-blowing."
"This is someone who was a 100 mph nurse prior to this and she was working in a cardiology practice, and she ran several half marathons and marathons and climbed mountains," Verduzco-Gutierrez said.
Verduzco-Gutierrez works primarily with Covid patients, including Ramey and Bryand, through the long Covid clinic she established in 2020.
She also spends a lot of her time on disability applications.
This is the final day of California’s COVID-19 state of emergency—an official declaration that has been in place since March 2020.
As state leaders took steps to mitigate the spread of the virus, they also had to deal with COVID’s economic impact.
Looking back over the past three years, how did the economic challenges of the pandemic—and the state’s response—evolve?
And what are Californians’ economic circumstances today?
At the beginning of the pandemic, the PPIC Statewide Survey found that Californians were very worried about both their health and their economic well-being.
Notably, Latinos and Californians with incomes under $40,000 were especially worried—a trend that would continue throughout the pandemic.
How did Californians feel about the state’s response?
In May 2020, strong majorities approved of Governor Newsom’s handling of both the coronavirus outbreak (69%) and jobs and the economy (59%).
Approval in both areas declined over the first year of the pandemic—and partisan differences were dramatic—but it did not dip below 50% in surveys through February 2022.
Throughout the pandemic, there have been dramatic swings in economic optimism.
The share of Californians who expected bad economic times skyrocketed from 43% in January 2020 to 79% in April 2020.
After rebounding in 2021, economic optimism dwindled in 2022, and our February 2023 survey found that 66% are expecting bad economic times.
It made sense that so many were pessimistic in spring 2020, given what happened in California’s job market: 2.8 million jobs were lost in the first two months (a 16% decline).
Unlike other recent recessions, however, jobs began to bounce back quickly.
By October 2022, 2.8 million jobs had been gained.
But these gains were not necessarily made in the sectors or occupations that experienced the greatest losses.
The sectors that remain farthest behind their pre-pandemic levels are accommodations and food service, arts and entertainment, and other services.
These sectors are still growing slowly, but the pandemic’s impact may be long term, given lagging demand for some services and increased demand for more flexible working conditions.
Government, retail trade, and manufacturing—large sectors of the California economy—are also slightly below pre-pandemic levels (as are subsectors like child care and nursing care).
On the other side of the spectrum, the surge in demand for goods during the pandemic remains evident in the transportation and warehousing sector, where jobs are up 16%.
As of December, jobs in health care and professional and scientific services were also the most elevated above pre-pandemic levels.
Even as unemployment numbers peaked at 3 million, Californians were buoyed by federal and state support.
About $100 billion in unemployment insurance, federal stimulus payments, California’s Golden State stimulus, and the expanded Child Tax Credit all had a stabilizing effect on household resources and helped many avert poverty.
In May 2020, 30% of Californians said they were financially worse off—a much lower share than the 53% who reported being worse off during the Great Recession.
By November 2021, only 18% reported being worse off—but lower-income Californians were still more likely to say they were negatively affected (29% less than $40,000, 18% $40, 000 to under $80,000, 13% $80,000 or more).
Labor market conditions have improved for workers, but wages have not kept up with inflation, leaving many Californians concerned about their current finances and the economic outlook.
In November 2022, about three in ten (29%) said that their personal finances had worsened over the past year—a share that was nearly identical early in the pandemic.
Costs are a major concern: in February 2023, 61% reported financial hardship due to rising prices and 45% were concerned about paying for housing.
Looking back at California’s three-year state of emergency on COVID-19, we can see dramatic swings in economic conditions.
While job loss at the beginning of the crisis was off-the-charts severe, many sectors rebounded quickly.
And, while government support and wage gains benefited many Californians, increased prices and cost of living have left many pessimistic about our economic future.
Now that the state’s fiscal challenges are also on the rise, policymakers face critical decisions as they chart a path toward economic vitality and opportunity for all.
BALTIMORE — As the federal public health emergency draws to a close in May, the Maryland Department of Health has unveiled new COVID-19 webpages.
The new webpages will cover topics such as vaccines, testing, treatment, data, and other resources, offering a source of detailed information for Maryland residents.
According to Maryland Department of Health Secretary Laura Herrera Scott, the changes signify a new phase in the state's COVID-19 response.
The old websites, covidLINK.maryland.gov and coronavirus.maryland.gov, are no longer accessible.
Maryland COVID data can now be accessed at health.maryland.gov/COVID and the open data portal, with data aligned with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and other public health reporting.
Other changes include replacing Maryland's testing and vaccine locators with federal locators, as well as altering the state's COVID contact tracing services.
Outreach to COVID patients ended on April 25, and the MD COVID Alert system will cease on May 9.
However, the state will still respond to COVID-19 institutional outbreaks and other public health situations, with local health departments continuing to distribute at-home tests.
Users of MD COVID Alert will be automatically notified when the application is no longer operational, requiring no further action on their part.
Key Takeaways Researchers are evaluating a new COVID test that would detect the virus based on voice and sound.
The test listens to how a person composes a sentence, in addition to their coughing and breathing sounds, to determine if they are COVID-19 negative or positive.
The test is still under study and is not available to the public, but may represent a breakthrough in virus detection.
Sick of nose swabbing for COVID-19?
Soon, you might be able to test for the virus by just talking to your phone.
Researchers in the Netherlands are studying if a mobile app could detect COVID-19 through changes in a user’s voice.
COVID-19 typically targets the upper respiratory system and the larynx, commonly known as the voice box, and it can affect the way people sound.
The team built an artificial intelligence model based on data from University of Cambridge’s COVID-19 Sounds App, which has over 800 audio samples from over 4,000 health participants and 308 people who tested positive for COVID-19.
These samples included recordings of the participants’ coughing, breathing, and reading sentences out loud.
“Mild or severe changes in one’s voice can be a sign of a variety of diseases, making vocal biomarkers a noninvasive tool to monitor patients, grade the severity, the stages of a disease or for drug development,” the researchers wrote.
The analysis tool can distinguish loudness, power, and variation over time in a person’s voice.
So far, the AI model is found to be 89% accurate in detecting the virus.
This could be an effective, non-invasive COVID testing method if it becomes available in the future.
“These promising results suggest that simple voice recordings and fine-tuned AI algorithms can potentially achieve high precision in determining which patients have COVID-19 infection,” said Wafaa Aljbawi, a coauthor of the study and a researcher at the Institute of Data Science at Maastricht University in the Netherlands.
Vocal tests have been used to diagnose other conditions before.
Some studies have shown that app-based audio tests can diagnose Parkinson’s disease with up to 99% accuracy.
When it comes to COVID-19, patients may have symptoms like a sore throat, a cough, or shortness of breath.
Excessive coughing may lead to a hushed or raspy voice, and shortness of breath may make someone pause more often to finish saying a sentence.
“Such tests can be provided at no cost and are simple to interpret.
Moreover, they enable remote, virtual testing and have a turnaround time of less than a minute,” Aljbawi said.
“They could be used, for example, at the entry points for large gatherings, enabling rapid screening of the population.”
It might take a while before a COVID voice test becomes available for public use.
For now, the researchers said they need to test the tool with more samples to confirm its accuracy.
More than 50,000 audio samples have been collected in the database so far.
What This Means For You COVID-19 can change how someone sounds.
In the future, you might be able to test whether you have COVID-19 by simply recording your voice on a mobile app.
The information in this article is current as of the date listed, which means newer information may be available when you read this.
For the most recent updates on COVID-19, visit our coronavirus news page.
When the virus that causes COVID-19 enters the body, it hijacks cellular proteins and suppresses the human inflammatory response, allowing the virus to spread.
University of Florida researchers have discovered a novel way in the lab to fight rapidly evolving strains of coronaviruses by breaking that cycle.
The group created a molecular “decoy” that blocks two proteins coronaviruses use to evade a normal immune system response.
Blocking these proteins prevents the virus from taking hold within human cells, the researchers found.
During early tests, short chains of amino acids, known as peptides, inhibited the replication and release of two coronaviruses including SARS-CoV-2.
The findings were published recently in the journal Frontiers in Immunology.
The UF team’s compounds don’t attack coronaviruses directly, said Alfred S. Lewin, Ph.D., a professor of molecular genetics and microbiology in the UF College of Medicine.
“These peptides have the potential to allow our immune system to fight off the virus more effectively,” Lewin said.
To establish their findings, the researchers focused on two coronaviruses.
One is a seasonal virus that causes upper-respiratory infections like the common cold.
Researchers at UF and elsewhere already knew that people with antibodies to it were less likely to develop serious COVOD-19 infections.
The presence of the pJAK2 peptide (top middle) is shown to block replication of a human coronavirus.
The next panel (top right) shows how an inactive control peptide does not affect the spread of the virus.
That potential benefit intrigued Chulbul M. Ahmed, Ph.D., a research assistant professor of molecular genetics and microbiology.
Their team developed a peptide known as pJAK2.
During testing on human cells, the compound significantly reduced the viruses’ concentrations and ability to replicate.
In SARS-CoV2, the peptide reduced the virus’s replication more than tenfold, the researchers found.
The cell-penetrating peptides work by acting as a decoy and suppressing two proteins that would otherwise allow invading viruses to thrive.
When the peptide was combined with a second virus-inhibiting protein, viral activity was inhibited even further than with either peptide treatment alone.
A future COVID-19 therapy based on pJAK2 intrigues the researchers for several reasons.
It can be synthesized easily and in large quantities at a reasonable cost, Ahmed said.
And it has natural origins as a cell-penetrating form of 13 amino acids already found in humans.
“The case to be made here is that we’re not dealing with a foreign substance.
It’s something that the human body already produces in some form,” Ahmed said.
The researchers believe pJAK2 would be most useful as an early-stage therapy that fights the SARS-CoV-2 virus by stimulating an immune response.
Several antiviral drugs to treat COVID-19 in its early stages are already on the market, including the well-known remdesivir.
“This would be a potentially useful treatment for someone with an early or intermediate-stage infection but certainly not for someone who already has a serious inflammatory response to the virus,” Lewin said.
The discovery may also prove to be a preventive treatment for COVID-19, Ahmed said.
Testing on the influenza virus revealed both therapeutic and preventive qualities.
Ahmed said it’s reasonable to believe those same characteristics could apply to SARS-CoV-2 and its variants as well as other viruses that lead to herpes, Ebola, the flu and monkeypox.
“For influenza, we have shown that it acts both as a prophylactic as well as a therapeutic compound.
So this could potentially be given to uninfected family members and primary contacts of the affected individuals to protect them from getting a more serious form of SARS-CoV-2,” Ahmed said.
Next, the researchers want to fully test their findings in primary human lung cells before moving to experiments in mouse models and eventually human clinical trials.
Research collaborators included Tristan R. Grams, Ph.D., a Ph.D. candidate in biomedical sciences; David C. Bloom, Ph.D., a professor and chair of the College of Medicine’s department of molecular genetics and microbiology; and Howard M. Johnson, Ph.D., an emeritus faculty member of the UF department of microbiology and cell science.
Research funding was provided by the Shaler Richardson Professorship endowment, Research to Prevent Blindness and multiple National Institutes of Health grants.
For the Media
Media contact: Doug Bennett at dougbennett@ufl.edu or 352-265-9400.
So how do we balance this desire for complete normalcy with the need to stay safe against COVID and other illnesses during Halloween?
Here are 6 tips.
“We are certainly still seeing COVID,” said, a certified physician assistant within Greensboro.
“So it is still something that we have to be vigilant about.
But there’s a lot of COVID fatigue, people are tired of wearing masks, they’re tired of having to deal with all of the rigamarole of getting tested every time they have a sniffle, cough or sore throat.”
1. Get the new COVID booster as well as your flu shot.
Also known as a bivalent vaccine, the current booster is designed to protect us from the Omicron variant.
“The Omicron variants are highly transmissible,” Jeffery said.
“So it’s easier to get it and, while the symptoms are much milder than we saw with the initial strains of COVID, they can still make people very sick.
Also, flu is here now.”
Good news: People can get their flu shot and bivalent COVID booster dose at the same time, if they’d like to.
“We encourage people to get both vaccines now,” Jeffery said.
“Keep in mind that they do take two weeks to reach full benefit in our system.
No vaccine is 100% effective but having been vaccinated reduces the severity of illness relative to people who are unvaccinated.”
2. Assess the level of risk you’re comfortable with.
COVID created a lot of sensitivity about physical closeness with others, especially strangers.
The effort to keep a distance of at least 6 feet from others in public became a common practice.
“The risks are still there,” Jeffery said.
“But we are better now at assessing our personal risk.
More people are vaccinated.
We have perhaps gotten better at having conversations with the people that we know and spend time with about what level of risk we’re comfortable with.”
So whether you’re attending a Halloween party or getting close to neighbors to trick-or-treat, masking is still safer and keeping distance from others is still safer.
But without mandates in place, it’s your choice.
“Know who you’re around and know what level of risk you’re comfortable with,” Jeffery said.
“Engage in the risk-reduction measures that work for you.”
3.
Keep your candy exchanges quick.
Leaving a bowl of candy out on the steps is still the safest option, but if you love handing out candy on Halloween, that’s a low-risk choice.
“This is a respiratory transmissible virus,” Jeffery said.
“So you touching a candy wrapper and then a kid touching a candy wrapper, that is not a way that COVID is generally transmitted.
Trick-or-treating is typically a brief encounter.
It would be safer to wear a mask while handing out candy, but the minimal exposure offers a relatively safe, though not risk-free, activity.”
4. Wash your hands well – and use hand sanitizer if you’re unable to.
“We know we stay healthier if we clean our hands more frequently and if we don’t touch our face,” Jeffery said.
“If you don’t have access to soap and water, use hand sanitizer after shaking hands and before you touch food.
Do the smart thing, which is relatively easy regardless of COVID.”
Make it festive, if that helps.
Stores are full of fall-themed soaps, from apple cider-scented to pumpkin spice-scented varieties.
Make the most of it.
CHICAGO --
Blackhawks captain Jonathan Toews announced Sunday that he is dealing with symptoms of long COVID-19 and chronic immune response syndrome.
Toews, 34, hasn't played since Jan. 28.
The Blackhawks placed the center on injured reserve Wednesday with what they said was a non-COVID-19-related illness.
"It has been really challenging to play through these symptoms," Toews said in a statement released by the team.
"In the last few weeks, it has reached the point where I had no choice but to step back and concentrate on getting healthy.
I am thankful for the patience and support of my teammates, the coaching staff, and the entire Blackhawks organization.
"
Toews missed the 2020-21 season with what he described as chronic immune response syndrome.
He has spent his entire career with Chicago, winning three Stanley Cup titles.
He is eligible for free agency after this season.
Blackhawks general manager Kyle Davidson told ESPN's Emily Kaplan on Sunday that with the uncertainty over Toews' health, he will not be traded.
The trade deadline is March 3 at 3 p.m. ET.
"We're going to work with him and support him in whatever he needs to make sure he's feeling good and feeling strong and in a spot where he can come back on the ice," Davidson told reporters.
"We'll take it day by day, but the hope is that he can still play some games here down the stretch.''
Toews had 12 goals and 25 assists in 71 games when he returned to action last year, and he had looked stronger this season.
He has 14 goals and 14 assists in 46 games for the Blackhawks.
"We feel for him and just supporting him right now,'' coach Luke Richardson said.
"He was back this week, first steps of getting back and working out and skating, and unfortunately he wasn't getting the results that he wanted.''
The Associated Press contributed to this report.
CNN —
North Korean leader Kim Jong Un looks like he’s in big trouble.
His country has announced an “explosive” outbreak of Covid-19, reporting more than 2 million cases of what it refers to as “fever” in little more than a week since its first reported case.
In a largely undeveloped and famously isolated country of 25 million, where the vast majority of people are thought to be unvaccinated, it has the potential to be a humanitarian disaster on the sort of scale that would threaten the grip on power of just about any government in the world.
But Pyongyang isn’t like any other government.
In fact, some experts say that rather than weaken Kim the outbreak could make him more powerful – by giving him an excuse to tighten his grip.
Kim has at his disposal an extensive propaganda machine and an ability to block outside information that could help him shape the narrative of this crisis in his favor – much as his predecessors did with the 1990s famine thought to have starved hundreds of thousands of North Koreans to death.
Back then, Pyongyang had framed its problems as an “Arduous March” – and blamed them partly on flooding and partly on American sanctions.
Kim is already showing signs of trying to stage manage this latest crisis.
Even before the outbreak was announced, Kim had been warning his officials to prepare for “another, more difficult Arduous March.”
That appeared to be a reference to severe food shortages that are once again facing the country and have likely been made worse by the very border lockdowns Kim introduced to keep the virus out.
Analysts are also suspicious about the timing of Pyongyang’s acknowledgment of the Covid outbreak.
Its previous insistence that it had been Covid-free had been a source of widespread skepticism and some suggest its sudden openness about its problems is timed deliberately to coincide with a visit to the region by President Joe Biden, who was due to arrive in South Korea on Thursday evening local time.
“The fact that Kim Jong Un has decided to come out and publicly announce this health crisis is quite telling,” said Lina Yoon, a senior Korea researcher at Human Rights Watch.
“(It) may have a political element, obviously.”
This may not be the only way Kim has of ensuring Pyongyang is top of the agenda when the President meets the South’s new leader Yoon Suk Yeol.
Intelligence from Washington suggests Kim is planning either a nuclear test or a launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile to coincide with the visit – an assessment shared by South Korea, which has prepared plans to respond to potential “provocations” from Pyongyang.
That would fit Kim’s recent behavior.
According to Seoul, on the same day North Korea announced its outbreak, it fired three short-range ballistic missiles into waters between the Korean Peninsula and Japan.
The lingering unknown is this: will Kim’s problems with Covid distract him from such a show of power, or will it make him more belligerent?
“Gravest state of emergency”
While Pyongyang may be seeking attention, few would suggest it is exaggerating its outbreak.
Indeed, until recently its lack of officially reported cases had prompted widespread skepticism.
Its official death toll as of Thursday was 62 deaths, but experts say the real figure could be far higher and is likely to balloon.
State media has reported that samples from some patients showed them to be carrying the Omicron variant, the high transmissibility of which could prove devastating in a population that is not only largely unvaccinated but – if official accounts are to be believed – has no natural immunity through prior infections.
North Korea is not known to have imported any coronavirus vaccines – despite being eligible for the global Covid-19 vaccine sharing program, Covax.
Last year, it publicly rejected an offer of nearly three million doses of China’s Sinovac Covid-19 vaccines.
On Monday, three North Korean cargo planes flew to China and back, according to a South Korean government official with knowledge of the matter.
It’s unknown what the planes were carrying, but the rare trip came after China pledged to help North Korea with its Covid outbreak.
“There is no evidence to show that North Korea has access to enough vaccines to protect its population from Covid-19,” said Amnesty International’s East Asia researcher Boram Jang.
“With the first official news of a Covid-19 outbreak in the country, continuing on this path could cost many lives and would be an unconscionable dereliction of upholding the right to health.”
In response, Kim has appeared unusually willing to admit the problems facing his country, declaring the “gravest state of emergency” and ordering all provinces and cities into lockdown.
But whether that will stoke popular anger against him seems unlikely to many experts given Kim’s ability to manipulate the state’s considerable propaganda machinery – as long as he can prevent the crisis from directly affecting the country’s ruling elites.
“If senior elites start dying en masse – there are quite a lot of them, and we don’t know if they are vaccinated – if many of them die of it, there may be questions asked about why North Korea didn’t vaccinate earlier,” said Chad O’Carroll, managing director of the Seoul-based NK News outlet.
Since the outbreak was announced, alongside videos telling people what to do if they exhibit Covid symptoms, state-run TV has devoted large amounts of time to clips of Kim inspecting epidemic command centers and pharmacies – perhaps designed to show he is in control of the situation.
A test of health care, and Kim’s leadership
Still, Yoon at Human Rights Watch said the very fact Pyongyang was publicly acknowledging the crisis suggested it had “very serious concerns” about the outbreak and the potential for it to spread.
“(North Korea) has an unvaccinated population and chronic malnourishment, and they have no medicines for treating basic symptoms of Covid-19,” Yoon said.
“North Korea is much more fragile than any other country that we know.”
Yoon said North Korea now urgently required foreign aid, particularly vaccines and medicine, and even if it accepts help – offers have come in from both the South and the World Health Organization – the vaccination process is likely to be slow because the country lacks the infrastructure to store or transport vaccines.
“It is going to test his leadership, and it is going to create some urgency for very creative storytelling in the North Korean propaganda apparatus,” said O’Carroll of NK News.
A priority for Kim’s state media will be to explain why strict border lockdowns failed to keep Omicron out.
O’Carroll pointed out that not only had those lockdowns failed, but they were a driving factor in the severe food shortages facing the countries as they had prevented deliveries of grain and fertilizer.
One option for Kim would be to stage a very public show of humility.
“We’ve seen Kim Jong Un crying about the nation’s sacrifices (in the past) – I think this is the type of thing he may do to try dampen outrage,” O’Carroll said.
“North Korean citizens have definitely been through a lot,” he said.
“The first thing he could do is really apologize and take some blame for it.”
Meanwhile, if Kim is indeed thinking of a show of force to coincide with Biden’s visit he might do well to think about one of his last shows of power.
O’Carroll said the timing of North Korea’s outbreak suggested a massive military parade Kim held last month to mark the 90th anniversary of the founding of its army had become a “super-spreader event.”
Crowds observing the parade were shown on film celebrating without face masks.
“We know that they flew in citizens from across North Korea to attend and celebrate that event,” he said.
“That’s the perfect petri dish for this virus to spread, so I think that parade will go down in history as a very bad idea for North Korea.”
CLAIM:
The COVID-19 vaccines contain HIV.
AP’S ASSESSMENT: False.
There is no evidence that any COVID-19 vaccine contains HIV, an expert in infectious diseases and vaccinology told The Associated Press.
Experts have repeatedly shot down similar claims in the past, explaining that the vaccines also do not make recipients more susceptible to contracting HIV.
THE FACTS: An Instagram post featuring baseless claims that the COVID-19 vaccines contain HIV, or human immunodeficiency virus, has spread widely online in recent days.
The post, which was viewed over 18,000 times, features a video with audio of someone stating, “The COVID-19 shot contains HIV.”
The post’s caption also includes the same claim, and also says: “So many Vaccine Aids victims.”
The claim is baseless.
The COVID-19 vaccines do not contain HIV, according to John Swartzberg, a clinical professor of infectious diseases and vaccinology at the University of California, Berkeley.
“I know of NO evidence that any SARS CoV2 vaccine (for that matter, any FDA approved vaccine) contains HIV,” Swartzberg wrote in an email to the AP on Sunday.
HIV is a virus that attacks the body’s immune system, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
If untreated, it can lead to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, or AIDS.
Various conspiracy theories falsely linking the COVID-19 vaccines to HIV and AIDS have spread online in the past, and other experts have reiterated that there is no connection.
“There is nothing in the COVID vaccines that contain either HIV or increase a body’s susceptibility to contracting HIV,” Dr. Monica Gandhi, associate chief of the division of HIV, infectious diseases and global medicine at the University of California San Francisco Medical School, told the AP in 2021.
As experts have noted, clinical trials testing the safety and efficacy of the COVID-19 vaccines and data from administering the shots globally found no evidence that vaccinated individuals are more susceptible to contracting HIV in general.
A similar conspiracy theory falsely claiming that vaccines are causing a new illness called “VAIDS,” short for vaccine acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, has circulated in the past.
There is no evidence that the vaccines cause any kind of immune deficiency condition, let alone AIDS, experts previously told the AP.
___
This is part of AP’s effort to address widely shared misinformation, including work with outside companies and organizations to add factual context to misleading content that is circulating online.
Learn more about fact-checking at AP.
BEIJING (AP) — Genetic material collected at a Chinese market near where the first human cases of COVID-19 were identified show raccoon dog DNA comingled with the virus, adding evidence to the theory that the virus originated from animals, not from a lab, international experts say.
“These data do not provide a definitive answer to how the pandemic began, but every piece of data is important to moving us closer to that answer,” World Health Organization Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said Friday.
How the coronavirus emerged remains unclear.
Many scientists believe it most likely jumped from animals to people, as many other viruses have in the past, at a wildlife market in Wuhan, China.
But Wuhan is home to several labs involved in collecting and studying coronaviruses, fueling theories scientists say are plausible that the virus may have leaked from one.
The new findings do not settle the question, and they have not been formally reviewed by other experts or published in a peer-reviewed journal.
Tedros criticized China for not sharing the genetic information earlier, telling a press briefing that “this data could have and should have been shared three years ago.”
The samples were collected from surfaces at the Huanan seafood market in early 2020 in Wuhan, where the first human cases of COVID-19 were found in late 2019.
Tedros said the genetic sequences were recently uploaded to the world’s biggest public virus database by scientists at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
https://apnews.com/video/politics-virginia-united-states-government-landslides-and-mudslides-australia-7b10e75800544728a82bb662c4378693?utm_source=homepage&utm_medium=TopNews&utm_campaign=position_02
They were then removed, but not before a French biologist spotted the information by chance and shared it with a group of scientists based outside China that’s looking into the origins of the coronavirus.
The data show that some of the COVID-positive samples collected from a stall known to be involved in the wildlife trade also contained raccoon dog genes, indicating the animals may have been infected by the virus, according to the scientists.
Their analysis was first reported in The Atlantic.
“There’s a good chance that the animals that deposited that DNA also deposited the virus,” said Stephen Goldstein, a virologist at the University of Utah who was involved in analyzing the data.
“If you were to go and do environmental sampling in the aftermath of a zoonotic spillover event … this is basically exactly what you would expect to find.”
The canines, named for their raccoon-like faces, are often bred for their fur and sold for meat in animal markets across China.
Ray Yip, an epidemiologist and founding member of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control office in China, said the findings are significant, even though they aren’t definitive.
“The market environmental sampling data published by China CDC is by far the strongest evidence to support animal origins,” Yip told the AP in an email.
He was not connected to the new analysis.
WHO’s COVID-19 technical lead, Maria Van Kerkhove, cautioned that the analysis did not find the virus within any animal, nor did it find any hard evidence that any animals infected humans.
“What this does provide is clues to help us understand what may have happened,” she said.
The international group also told WHO they found DNA from other animals as well as raccoon dogs in the samples from the seafood market, she added.
The coronavirus’ genetic code is strikingly similar to that of bat coronaviruses, and many scientists suspect COVID-19 jumped into humans either directly from a bat or via an intermediary animal like pangolins, ferrets or racoon dogs.
Efforts to determine the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic have been complicated by factors including the massive surge of human infections in the pandemic’s first two years and an increasingly bitter political dispute.
It took virus experts more than a dozen years to pinpoint the animal origin of SARS, a related virus.
Goldstein and his colleagues say their analysis is the first solid indication that there may have been wildlife infected with the coronavirus at the market.
But it is also possible that humans brought the virus to the market and infected the raccoon dogs, or that infected humans simply happened to leave traces of the virus near the animals.
After scientists in the group contacted the China CDC, they say, the sequences were removed from the global virus database.
Researchers are puzzled as to why data on the samples collected over three years ago wasn’t made public sooner.
Tedros has pleaded with China to share more of its COVID-19 research data.
Gao Fu, the former head of the Chinese CDC and lead author of the Chinese paper, didn’t immediately respond to an Associated Press email requesting comment.
But he told Science magazine the sequences are “nothing new.
It had been known there was illegal animal dealing and this is why the market was immediately shut down.”
Goldstein said his group presented its findings this week to a WHO advisory panel investigating COVID-19’s origins.
Michael Imperiale of the University of Michigan, a microbiology and immunology expert who was not involved in the data analysis, said finding a sample with sequences from the virus and a raccoon dog “places the virus and the dog in very close proximity.
But it doesn’t necessarily say that the dog was infected with the virus; it just says that they were in the same very small area.”
He said the bulk of the scientific evidence at this point supports a natural exposure at the market, and pointed to research published last summer showing the market was likely the early epicenter of the scourge and concluding that the virus spilled from animals into people two separate times.
“What’s the chance that there were two different lab leaks?” he asked.
Mark Woolhouse, an infectious diseases expert at the University of Edinburgh, said it will be crucial to see how the raccoon dogs’ genetic sequences match up to what’s known about the historic evolution of the COVID-19 virus.
If the dogs are shown to have COVID and those viruses prove to have earlier origins than the ones that infected people, “that’s probably as good evidence as we can expect to get that this was a spillover event in the market.”
After a weeks-long visit to China to study the pandemic’s origins, WHO released a report in 2021 concluding that COVID-19 most probably jumped into humans from animals, dismissing the possibility of a lab origin as “extremely unlikely.”
But the U.N. health agency backtracked the following year, saying “key pieces of data” were still missing.
And Tedros has said all hypotheses remain on the table.
The China CDC scientists who previously analyzed the Huanan market samples published a paper as a preprint in February suggesting that humans brought the virus to the market, not animals, implying that the virus originated elsewhere.
Their paper didn’t mention that animal genes were found in the samples that tested positive.
In February, the Wall Street Journal reported that the U.S. Department of Energy had assessed “with low confidence” that the virus had leaked from a lab.
But others in the U.S. intelligence community disagree, believing it more likely it first came from animals.
Experts say the true origin of the pandemic may not be known for many years — if ever.
___
Cheng reported from London.
AP Science Writer Laura Ungar contributed to this story from Louisville.
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Science and Educational Media Group.
The AP is solely responsible for all content.
In this Perspective, we considered all studies that followed animals for more than 14 days post-inoculation (dpi) as ‘long-term studies’.
GSH
The GSH (Mesocricetus auratus) is a valuable small animal model for the study of SARS-CoV-2 infection, because the GSH is naturally susceptible to infection52.
A study has reported multi-organ damage with infiltration of inflammatory cells and necrosis in upper and lower airways, secondary lymphoid organs, the digestive tract, kidneys, adrenal gland and ovaries in this model 5–7 dpi with the SARS-CoV-2/WH-09/human/2020/CHN isolate.
These lesions were very mild in nonrespiratory tissues and could still be present by 18 dpi.
In addition, different levels of viral genomic RNA (detected by quantitative PCR with reverse transcription (RT–qPCR) and in situ hybridization) and/or S and N proteins (detected by immunohistochemistry) were detectable up to 7 dpi in nasopharynges, trachea, lungs, kidneys, testis, vesicular gland, prostate, adrenal gland, spleen and lymph nodes53.
Similarly, another study showed that microglial activation and accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau and α-synuclein persisted in the brain of SARS-CoV-2-inoculated hamsters after viral clearance (14 dpi), in the olfactory bulb (OB) and in the cortical neurons, respectively, without any evidence of neuroinvasion (as shown by a lack of detectable S protein by immunohistochemistry), which suggests these pathological features contribute to the long-lasting neurological signs of SARS-CoV-2 infection54.
Additionally, a long-term study compared the systemic effects of SARS-CoV-2 (USA-WA1/2020 isolate) with those of influenza A virus (IAV) pandemic strain H1N1 (A/California/04/2009 isolate) in GSH for up to 31 dpi (a timepoint when infectious particles for either infection were no longer detectable in any of the investigated tissues)55.
This study found that the histological alterations induced by SARS-CoV-2 in the lungs (peribronchiolar metaplasia and monocyte and neutrophil infiltration in the alveolar space) and kidneys (areas of tubular atrophy and presence of proteinaceous fluid in the interstitial space) were more severe than those induced by IAV and persisted for a longer period after the resolution of infection.
Moreover, the transcriptomic analysis of the olfactory tissue and of different areas of the CNS revealed that, while both viruses caused a similar pattern of perturbations in the CNS that persisted for over a month, SARS-CoV-2 induced a unique profile in the olfactory tissue of GSH.
Thirty-one days after SARS-CoV-2 infection, genes associated with microglial activation and macrophage infiltration (these increases in gene expression were confirmed by immunostaining), T cell recruitment and activation, type I interferon and chemokine response were upregulated, while genes involved in sensory perception and olfactory capabilities were downregulated.
At 26 dpi, SARS-CoV-2-infected GSH also showed a reduction in burying activity when subjected to the marble-burying assay compared with IAV-infected and noninfected hamsters, demonstrating a change in this spontaneous rodent behavior following SARS-CoV-2 infection55.
Interestingly, injury and chronic inflammation of the OB have been previously linked to neurobehavioral disorders because OB function can impact sensory, emotional and cognitive processes given the proximity of the OB to the limbic system responsible for such reactions56.
Therefore, the behavioral changes observed in SARS-CoV-2-infected GSH suggest that long-term OB inflammation causes neurodegenerative changes that are compatible with PCC neurological symptoms.
This observation is in line with evidence of gray matter loss in the limbic and olfactory cortical areas of patients who have recovered from COVID-19, even with mild acute manifestations55,57.
In addition, SARS-CoV-2 infection in GSH has been linked to mechanical hypersensitivity during both the acute and post-acute phases (28 dpi) of SARS-CoV-2 infection, which resembles the somatosensory abnormalities observed in patients with PCC.
This prolonged hypersensitivity coincided with the differential expression of several genes associated with neuro-oncological and neurodegenerative disorders (including glioblastoma, Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases and neurilemmoma) compared with noninfected hamsters.
The same transcriptomic analysis predicted the contribution of macrophages and Schwann cells, already known to be involved in neuropathic pain and hypersensitivity, to the SARS-CoV-2-induced proinflammatory state.
Interestingly, these results were obtained long after viral clearance, suggesting that the presence of viral transcript (but not infectious particles) and type I interferon response in the peripheral nervous system (dorsal root ganglia and spinal cord) during the first 24 h post-inoculation was sufficient to induce persistent maladaptive neuronal responses58.
Mice
Given the substantial differences in amino acid sequences between human and mouse ACE2, the latter is not a functional receptor for the ancestral SARS-CoV-2 strain.
hACE2-transgenic (hACE2-tg) mice, transient hACE2 expression and virus adaptation to the mouse are among the strategies employed to circumvent this limitation21.
In addition, different humanized mice have been used as models of PCC, with a particular focus on the lungs and the respiratory tract.
MISTRG6 humanized mice, reconstituted with human immune cells and transiently expressing hACE2 via an adeno-associated vector (AAV-hACE2), have been used to reproduce the human innate and adaptive responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Results from this model have suggested that human immune cells contribute to the pathological inflammatory response in the lungs and to viral RNA persistence, which was detected until 35 dpi, either as a result of direct infection of ACE2-expressing myeloid cells or as a residue of phagocyted infected epithelial cells59.
Similar results have been obtained in DRAGA (HLA-A2.HLA-DR4.Rag1KO.IL2RγcKO.NOD) humanized mice, which when infused with human hematopoietic stem cells from cord blood reconstitute both a functional human immune system and hACE2-expressing human epithelial and endothelial cells in the lung and upper respiratory airways.
Inoculated animals were followed for 25 days, which revealed mild to severe lung pathology with inflammatory infiltrate and alveolar damage until the end of the study60.
A longer-term study monitored neuroinflammation up to 7 weeks post-infection (wpi) with SARS-CoV-2 (isolate USA-WA1/2020) in wild-type CD1 mice transduced with AAV-hACE2 in the trachea and lungs by intratracheal injection61.
This model simulates a mild respiratory infection with no to moderate lung pathology and no viral neuroinvasion.
Increased protein levels of proinflammatory cytokines (IFNγ, IL-6, TNF, CXCL10, CCL7, CCL2, CCL11, BAFF and GMCSF) were observed both in the serum and CSF of infected mice as early as 7 dpi.
Interestingly, CSF levels of C–C motif chemokine 11 (CCL11), known to limit neurogenesis and contribute to cognitive impairment, further increased until at least 7 wpi, while they normalized in the serum at the same timepoint.
This increase in CCL11 CSF levels was associated with increased microglial activation in the subcortical white matter (as indicated by increased expression of allograft inflammatory factor 1 (AIF1; also known as IBA1) marker in CD68+ cells), which persisted during the entire study period.
Moreover, transcriptomic analysis at 7 dpi and 7 wpi revealed an increase in the abundance of a chemokine-expressing subpopulation of the microglia as well as an altered profile in the homeostatic microglia subpopulation, with upregulation of genes associated with cytotoxicity, inflammation, antigen processing and presentation.
Interestingly, this gene signature partially overlaps with the expression profiles of pathological cell states such as disease-associated microglia observed in Alzheimer’s disease, and white-matter-associated microglia observed in aging.
SARS-CoV-2-infected mice also exhibited a persistent decrease in neurogenesis in the hippocampus and a decrease in myelinated axon density during the entire study period, as well as a decrease in mature oligodendrocytes (ASPA+ CC1+ population) at 7 dpi, which recovered by 7 wpi.
The magnitude of myelin loss was strikingly similar to that observed after chemotherapy exposure, confirming the similarity between ‘COVID-19 brain fog’ and ‘chemo fog’61.
Studies using a mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 strain (MA10) have reported productive infection with severe lung injury and mortality in standard laboratory mice62,63.
Although no virus was detected in the brain of intranasally infected animals, this model showed an upregulation of proinflammatory cytokine messenger RNAs, altered BBB permeability and an increase in IBA1+ microglial cells in the cortical region of 1-year-old Rag–/– mice (a mouse model lacking mature lymphocytes).
Histological analysis of aged Rag–/– brain samples revealed prominent lymphocyte perivascular cuffing, indicating inflammation of blood vessels at 30-days post inoculation64.
Long-term studies using the mouse adapted MA10 strain in immunocompetent mice are needed to confirm these findings and to determine the extent of brain damage and neurological impairment caused by SARS-CoV-2.
NHPs
NHPs have been successfully used for the study of human brain disorders, viral infections and respiratory diseases, taking advantage of their phylogenetic proximity and anatomical and physiological similarity to humans65,66,67.
Over the past 3 years, NHPs have been of great interest in the study of both acute and post-acute SARS-CoV-2 infection21,68.
A study following rhesus macaques and African green monkeys for 28 days after infection with the SARS-CoV-2 USA-WA1/2020 virus strain revealed neuroinflammation, as well as brain hypoxia, microhemorrhages and lesions similar to autopsy findings from patients who died after SARS-CoV-2 infection69.
Neuroinflammation signatures, determined by the expression of the pan-microglial marker IBA1 and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), were greater in infected animals than in mock-infected control animals, and revealed more pronounced astrocytic hypertrophy in these animals.
In addition, the inoculated animals in this study displayed neuronal morphological changes in the cerebellum and the brainstem, such as degenerated Purkinje neurons exhibiting cellular blebs and cytoplasmic vacuoles, and adjacent pyknotic glial cells with condensed nuclei.
These lesions were found concomitantly with cleaved caspase 3 staining, indicating that apoptosis was one of the mechanisms underlying such neuronal degeneration.
Very low levels of viral S RNA were detected in the brain of some of the infected animals; S expression was always limited to vascular endothelial cells, with no involvement of parenchymal cells.
The virus was not detected in the CSF of infected NHPs, which might suggest hematological dissemination of the virus to the brain.
Interestingly, hypoxic–ischemic injuries, with areas of intense positivity for the hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) were detected within and around blood vessels in the brain of infected animals69.
Given that the expression of this protein can be upregulated by proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF — a factor abundant in the serum of patients with severe COVID-19 — and by the SARS-CoV-2 protein translated from ORF3 (ref. 10), at least in vitro, hypoxia could be both a direct and an indirect effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
It is worth mentioning that signs of hypoxia were also detected in animals that did not develop severe respiratory disease, suggesting that it could be one of the causes of neurological disorder even after mild COVID-19, as observed in patients70,71.
The advanced age (13–21 years) of the NHPs used for this study might have acted as a confounding factor: all morphological changes and inflammatory features were also observed in mock-infected animals, although at a lower level.
It is therefore probable that the infection contributed to the worsening of pre-existing, age-related lesions rather than being their triggering cause.
Moreover, none of the 12 infected animals displayed clinical signs of neurological disorders, except for one female African green monkey that was found recumbent and marginally responsive to stimuli at 8 dpi (ref. 69).
Animal models with CNS involvement during the acute phase of COVID-19
Considering the small number of models currently available for the study of the long-term neurological manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 infection, it is worth considering all preclinical studies that have shown either neuroinvasion or neuroinflammation during the acute phase of the infection.
In one study, infectious viral particles were isolated from different areas of the brain of SARS-CoV-2-infected hamsters 4 dpi, indicating that the virus can reach and productively replicate in the CNS of this animal model.
Viral particles were also detected in the same animals' olfactory neuroepithelium, along with infiltrating myeloid cells and upregulated expression of proinflammatory markers72.
On the other hand, K18-hACE2-tg mice — mice carrying the hACE2 sequence under the control of the cytokeratin-18 (K18) gene promoter — are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection, develop severe lesions including massive brain invasion, neuronal death and neuroinflammation, and succumb by 5–7 dpi when given a dose of either 103 TCID50 SARS-CoV-2 or 105 plaque forming unit intranasally73,74,75.
This model has been successfully used for testing vaccines and antivirals but does not properly replicate human COVID-19.
However, a short-term study in 2022 has now shown that the administration of aerosolized SARS-CoV-2 to K18-hACE2 mice leads to efficient respiratory infection and anosmia without fatal neuroinvasion, even at the same dose76.
Similarly, a study showed that K18-hACE2 mice intranasally inoculated with 103 plaque forming unit of the BA.1 (Omicron) variant develop mild respiratory pathology without neuroinvasion up to 7 dpi (ref. 77).
Notwithstanding the differences in ACE2 expression and in the severity of SARS-CoV-2-induced disease between K18-hACE2 mice and humans, it is possible to achieve a nonfatal disease via a fine modulation of the experimental inoculation (that is, use of a sublethal dose or a less pathological variant, and use of a more natural administration route such as aerosolization), which might extend the survival of the infected animals sufficiently to allow the study of long-term consequences of SARS-CoV-2 infection78.
Less extensively used than the K18-hACE2 mice, hACE2 knock-in (KI) mice are considered a more physiologically relevant model, because the expression of the human receptor is under the control of the endogenous promoter of mACE2, thereby preventing ectopic expression.
One short-term study using hACE2-KI mice has shown very low levels of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the brain and OB of some of the inoculated mice at 7 dpi (ref. 79).
The presence of replicating particles and the long-term effect of viral presence in the brain have not been investigated in these animals.
An early study on rhesus macaques infected with SARS-CoV-2 (isolate KMS1/2020) also showed neuroinvasion.
Viral RNA was detected by RT–qPCR in the brain and spinal cord of the NHPs on day 9 post-intranasal infection, while it was detected as soon as 2 dpi and during the entire study period in the lungs and trachea.
The animals in the study had transient viremia, suggesting systemic spread of the virus through the bloodstream.
Histological analysis of the CNS also revealed hyperemia and edema in some of the samples80, but those findings might not be specific to SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Interestingly, ferrets (Mustela putorius furo) are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection, but they develop only minor clinical signs even in the presence of mild histological lesions in the lower respiratory tract.
In a study aimed at determining the effect of age in SARS-CoV-2-induced pathology and immunity, viral RNA was detected in extra respiratory tissues including the brain of both young and adult animals up to 5 dpi, but the production of infectious virus was not demonstrated81.
Moreover, no evidence of neurological clinical signs was observed.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has its eyes on yet another new COVID-19 variant that has been linked to a spike in hospitalizations overseas.
EG.5.1, nicknamed Eris, was added to the WHO SARS-CoV-2 variant monitoring list and has quickly become prevalent in both the U.K. and U.S.
As of July 20, Eris is the second most common variant infecting people in the U.K., accounting for roughly 14.55% of cases and growing at a rate of 20.51% per week, according to The U.K. Health Security Agency (UKHSA).
It trails behind fellow Omicron subvariant Arcturus, or XBB.1.16, at 41.82% of U.S. cases.
What is the COVID Omicron variant Eris?
Eris is a nickname given to EG.5.1, a subvariant of Omicron (B.1.1.529).
It was added to the WHO watch list, along with EG.5 under the umbrella E.G5#, a notation that covers the EG.5 lineage.
T. Ryan Gregory, Professor of Integrative Biology at the University of Guelph in Ontario, Canada, began calling the variant Eris in posts on X, formerly Twitter.
COVID in 2023:COVID rates are climbing but nowhere near what they were.
This year's story is different.
Where is the new variant Eris spreading?
Eris has already surpassed Arcturus in the U.S., becoming the most prevalent variant in the two-week period ending on August 5, with 17.3% of cases, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Both the U.S. and U.K. have endured an increase in COVID hospitalizations over the summer months, with the U.S. seeing a 12.1% increase in hospital admissions the week ending July 22, according to CDC tracking.
In England, there was a 40.7% increase in hospitalizations the week ending July 29 versus the seven days prior, according to the UKHSA.
What are the symptoms of Eris?
According to Zoe Health Study, an organization that monitors and estimates COVID cases in the U.K., Eris has similar symptoms to Omicron.
The most common include:
Runny or stuffy nose
Headache
Fatigue
Sneezing
Sore throat
Coughing
Changes to sense of smell
COVID, wildfires hit Hawaii:People rush for safety as Hawaii wildfires burn, rising COVID-19 rates: 5 Things podcast
What to do if you test positive
If you believe you may have COVID or test positive, the CDC suggests several ways to treat the symptoms and stop the spread.
Veterans need to know the VA's plan to protect them as the threat of COVID-19 continues.
Beginning Monday, May 23, 2022, the Veteran Health Administration (VHA) will implement a nation-wide COVID-19 Future State Operational Plan that will roll out three standardized VHA Health Protection Levels – low, medium, and high.
Here’s what to know:
Implementing the COVID-19 VHA Health Protection Levels (low, medium, and high) will help Veterans and staff know what preventive steps to take based on the latest CDC data when entering a Veteran Health Indiana facility:
Safety protocols – wearing a mask, screening, visitations, and social distancing COVID-19 community transmission level
On Mondays, signage at all Veteran Health Indiana health care facilities’ screening entrances will reflect the CDC’s Indiana county’s Health Protection Levels (low, medium, or high) and safety protocols for the week.
Masking will remain in effect regardless of Health Protection Level (low, medium, or high).
Health Protection Level updates will be provided at www.va.gov/indiana-health-care/ and www.facebook.com/vaindianapolis.
If Veterans are experiencing any COVID symptoms, they are asked to contact their PACT Team through the Patient Response Center at 317-988-1772, option 2, for further instructions.
If you have diabetes, you are no more likely to catch coronavirus (COVID-19) than anyone else.
However people with diabetes are more vulnerable to developing a severe illness if they do get coronavirus, but the way it affects you can vary from person to person.
All the coronavirus information below applies to the whole of the UK, unless specified.
We've noted where are some differences in guidance and diabetes services across the UK.
How coronavirus can affect people with diabetes
The majority of people who do get coronavirus – whether they have diabetes or not – will have mild symptoms and don’t need to go into hospital.
However, everyone with diabetes, including those with type 1, type 2, gestational and other types, is more vulnerable to developing a severe illness if they do get coronavirus.
This is why people living with diabetes are classed as being in a 'clinical risk group' for the coronavirus vaccines.
In adults with diabetes, there are certain factors that increase risk of serious illness like being older, having a high HbA1c, or having a history of diabetes-related complications.
There are other factors too, like your BMI and ethnicity, that research shows can have an impact on your risk.
In children with diabetes, the risk of becoming seriously ill with coronavirus is very low.
There are some risk factors that you can't change, but others where you can reduce your risk.
Being ill can make your blood sugar go all over the place.
Your body tries to fight the illness by releasing stored glucose (sugar) into your blood stream to give you energy.
But your body can’t produce enough or any insulin to cope with this, so your blood sugars rise.
Your body is working overtime to fight the illness, making it harder to manage your diabetes.
This means you’re more at risk of having serious blood sugar highs and lows, potentially leading to DKA (diabetic ketoacidosis) or HHS (hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state).
How to reduce your risk of getting seriously ill from coronavirus
Research shows that having the vaccine reduces the risk of getting seriously ill with coronavirus.
There are some things that can help you keep safe:
get your coronavirus vaccines and booster when you are eligible
wash your hands regularly, for 20 seconds
keep indoor spaces well ventilated and opt for meeting outdoors, where possible
wear a face covering in enclosed spaces, if not exempt.
Lateral flow tests
Rapid lateral flow tests are available to encourage people to test themselves regularly.
You can buy rapid lateral flow tests from a pharmacy.
The government has produced a step-by-step guide for people with visual impairment, on how to use and return your test kits.
Managing your blood glucose (sugar) levels
Research has shown that having a high HbA1c can increase your risk of becoming seriously ill from coronavirus.
So it’s important to work with your diabetes team to try to bring your blood sugar levels to a healthy range.
Getting the coronavirus vaccines
People living with diabetes are classed as being in a 'clinical risk group' for coronavirus vaccination because they are more at risk of becoming seriously ill from coronavirus.
The most important way people living with diabetes can lower this risk is to avoid catching the virus in the first place.
A vaccine is the most effective way to prevent infection and that’s why we strongly encourage you to get the vaccine.
Anyone aged 5 or over can get a first and second dose of the coronavirus vaccine.
And now anyone over 50 and people with diabetes aged 5 and over will be offered a booster dose this autumn.
Get more information about the coronavirus vaccines, including who can get it and how safe it is for people with diabetes.
The government has also released an easy-read guide about the booster vaccinations.
"There have been lots of myths about the vaccine in the South Asian community.
But I’ve had the vaccine, my 98-year-old dad has had it and we’re both fine – and you will be too.
And it means you can make sure you and your family are safe."
- Abdul helps clear up myths about diabetes as one of our volunteers, read his story
NHS Covid Pass
You may be asked to prove your vaccination status before you can enter large venues and events using an NHS COVID Pass.
To get an NHS Covid Pass, you will need to download and register your details on the NHS App if you are in England or Wales, the NHS Scotland Covid Status App or the Northern Ireland Covidcert NI app.
Find out more about Getting an NHS COVID Pass.
Face masks and coverings
Face coverings are no longer required by law in any setting, although some businesses, transport providers and supermarkets are asking their staff and customers to continue to wear one.
Public health guidance remains in place, suggesting people should continue to wear a face covering in crowded and enclosed spaces, where you may come into contact with people you don't normally meet.
Staff and children in secondary schools are not required to wear masks in classrooms.
We support the continued wearing of face masks for people with diabetes or anyone who wants to.
Wearing a mask helps keep you and others safe and is a simple way to reduce your risk as you go about your daily life.
We hope employers across the UK continue to be considerate of the wellbeing of their employees and consider the benefits of encouraging face masks within their premises.
There are certain reasons why some people don’t need to wear a face covering – called exemptions.
These include children (depending on their age), if you have asthma, and other reasons.
If you get coronavirus
If you do get coronavirus, it’s really important that you follow your sick day rules.
This will help you to keep your blood sugars in range as much as possible, so you can stay well and fight the virus.
We know it’s not that always that simple.
Take a look at our new courses in Learning Zone to help you remember your sick day rules and manage your blood sugar levels, and our guide on staying home and managing diabetes.
Some people are being treated for coronavirus with a steroid called dexamethasone, which can make your blood sugars go high.
Find out more about the steroid dexamethasone and diabetes.
Remember, for urgent medical help, call 999.
"I’m just trying not to worry too much.
I think it’s a case of taking precautions and following the government guidelines, as well as doing my very best to look after my health.
"
- Snita has diabetes and recovered from coronavirus symptoms – read her story
How coronavirus can affect children with diabetes
Children typically have mild symptoms if they catch the virus.
We are not aware of any children with diabetes who have died from coronavirus.
However, as with all people with diabetes, an illness like coronavirus can make it harder to manage your child’s diabetes and the risk of DKA will be higher when they are unwell.
A vaccine is the most effective way to prevent getting ill from coronavirus and that's why we strongly encourage anyone who is eligible to get the vaccine - this includes children aged 5 years and above.
How coronavirus can affect pregnancy and diabetes
The same rules apply to you as for everyone with diabetes.
If you’re pregnant and have diabetes, then you are not more at risk of getting the virus.
However, if you do get the virus, you could be more at risk of developing complications and it could become harder to manage your diabetes.
It's important you know how to reduce your risk, which includes getting the vaccines.
You can find all the latest information on the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists website.
How coronavirus can affect people in type 2 diabetes remission
Diabetes remission works differently for different people, and we still don't know enough about it.
So we don't know for sure how the virus could affect you if you’re in remission.
Everyone, including people in diabetes remission, should know how to reduce their risk of getting coronavirus, including getting the vaccines.
You can find more general information in our guide to type 2 diabetes remission.
How coronavirus can affect people from Black, Asian and minority ethnic groups
The risk of death from coronavirus for some ethnic groups is higher than for people of white ethnicity.
But it is important to remember that there are lots of factors involved, like age, and overall risk of dying from coronavirus is very low.
In England and Wales, data from the Office of National Statistics shows how people from certain Black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) groups are more at risk than people of white ethnicity.
Research in Scotland hasn’t shown this increased risk, but the BAME population there is very small.
And we don’t have data on this in Northern Ireland at the moment.
Data from Office of National Statistics.
Covid-19 deaths by ethnicity in England and Wales between 2 March and 10 April 2020.
We don’t know why this is happening.
The data takes into account factors which we know can increase risk, such as age, socioeconomic status and health, including obesity.
And we do know that some ethnic minority groups are more at risk of developing conditions like type 2 diabetes and heart problems, which are linked to increased risk of death from coronavirus.
It’s clear that we need further research to understand what’s causing this – whether the causes are physical, cultural or social.
Can coronavirus cause diabetes?
There is mixed evidence to suggest that coronavirus might be triggering diabetes in some people, or making the condition worse for others.
We've taken a look at the research so far and explain what scientists are doing to find answers.
Long COVID
Long COVID is used to describe signs and symptoms that last for a few weeks or months after having a confirmed or suspected case of COVID-19.
It can affect your whole body, and your symptoms can change and come and go over time.
If you think you might have Long COVID, the first thing you should do is speak to your GP.
They will look into your symptoms and first try to find out if there are any other possible causes.
Treatment of Long COVID or COVID fatigue will depend on how long you have been experiencing these symptoms.
Treatment is often focused on managing the symptoms and this can vary from person to person.
Some research studies have suggested that having diabetes could make you more likely to develop Long COVID, but it’s too early to know for sure yet.
The government has pledged £18.5 million to fund research to better understand and treat the longer-term effects of coronavirus.
These projects will help us better understand if diabetes is a risk factor for Long COVID.
Managing both the symptoms of Long COVID and your diabetes may be difficult but make sure you're aware of your sick day rules and take each day as it comes.
This can be a difficult time and we are here for you.
Going to work
Wherever you live in the UK, your employer must make sure your workplace is safe – this means doing a risk assessment at work.
We know that some people with diabetes don't feel safe going to work, so we have been calling on the government and employers to make it safer.
If you have concerns about your safety at work, we've got more information about your rights in our diabetes and work guide.
Going to appointments or into hospital
If you have coronavirus symptoms, do not go to a GP surgery, pharmacy or hospital even if you have an appointment.
If you're already having treatment for something like a foot or eye problem, and you don't have coronavirus symptoms, then your appointments should still carry on.
If you're worried about going to your clinic or hospital at this time or want to check whether your appointment is still going ahead, call the number on your appointment letter or speak to your GP.
Some of your appointments with your diabetes healthcare team may be on the phone or online, using a video call.
Your diabetes healthcare team will give you advice on the best type of appointment for you at this time.
Having a phone or video appointment might feel strange if you're not used to it but we've got advice on preparing for a remote appointments.
Most routine appointments like your annual diabetes review that had been delayed or postponed should be going back to normal.
In the meantime, follow your current routine including checking your feet daily, keep to a healthy diet and try to keep active.
Eye screening is still going ahead in some circumstances and for some people who are at higher risk of problems, such as pregnant women with diabetes.
All eye screening clinics should be using personal protective equipment (PPE).
And remember to get your free flu jab as early as possible.
Speak to your GP or go to your local pharmacy.
Find out more about the flu jab.
If you are invited to an in-person appointment it’s very important to attend unless you develop coronavirus symptoms.
"Flu increases the risk of needing to go into hospital for people with diabetes so we must do all we can to keep protected against flu this year.
That's why the free NHS flu jab is so important.
"
- Dan Howarth, our Head of Care and Diabetes Specialist Nurse
If you spot something new you're concerned about, like a cut or blister on your foot, call your GP and explain your situation.
If you can't get through, call 111 for advice.
If you have any change in your vision you should contact your local screening service or optometrist.
You may be in a situation where you need medical attention – this may be something related to your diabetes, or it may be something unrelated like an injury or illness.
This means you might have to go to the Accident and Emergency (A&E) department of your local hospital and you might have to wait a while before being seen.
During this time, your care in hospital may be a little different to normal, for example you may not see the diabetes team or not have family with you when you go into hospital.
For any problem, regardless of the current situation, you should go to hospital as you would've done before – the NHS is still open.
Read our guide to managing your diabetes while in hospital.
Travel
Travel restrictions differ depending on where you live, so we recommend you check the appropriate guidance before travelling:
Check the UK government website for the latest rules on travelling.
You could also check the TravelHealthPro website for the latest travel health guidance.
Take a look at our guide to travelling when you have diabetes for lots more information, including travel insurance to cover coronavirus.
AllClear Travel Insurance provide the following coronavirus cover:
If you need to cancel your trip because you or someone you're travelling with is diagnosed with coronavirus within 14-days of your planned departure.
If you need to return home from your trip earlier than planned due to the hospitalisation or death of an immediate relative as a result of contracting coronavirus.
If you need to extend your trip due to contracting coronavirus or having to quarantine on the advice of a medical practitioner.
If you catch coronavirus during your trip and you need medical treatment.
You can find out more about AllClear's Coronavirus Travel Insurance on their website.
Where can I get more support?
We know some people may not have friends and family able to help while they are staying at home.
You may be able to get help from voluntary groups in your area or your local councils or local authorities.
Check your government websites for more information.
You could also find out if there's a diabetes local group in your area.
Use our postcode search.
Need to talk?
You might be feeling worried and anxious about coronavirus and how it might be affecting you or your family and friends.
We know this could be a stressful time, so you may need support with how you’re feeling.
We have some helpful information to help you cope with stress and other emotions, or you might like to call our helpline to talk it through with someone.
We also have a useful coronavirus thread on our online forum, where members are sharing information and experiences so you might find answers to any more questions.
We arranged for Devanshi, who is living with type 1 diabetes and living in Leicester, to meet Anna who works on our helpline.
Did you know that you don't need a question about diabetes to call us?
Find out what Anna and Devanshi chatted out.
Our coronavirus safety assurances
New York CNN Business —
The Covid-19 pandemic has been good for the wallets of the wealthy.
Some 573 people have joined the billionaire ranks since 2020, bringing the worldwide total to 2,668, according to an analysis released by Oxfam on Sunday.
That means a new billionaire was minted about every 30 hours, on average, so far during the pandemic.
The report, which draws on data compiled by Forbes, looks at the rise of inequality over the past two years.
It is timed to coincide with the kickoff of the annual World Economic Forum meeting in Davos, Switzerland, a gathering of some of the wealthiest people and world leaders.
Billionaires have seen their total net worth soar by $3.8 trillion, or 42%, to $12.7 trillion during the pandemic.
A large part of the increase has been fueled by strong gains in the stock markets, which was aided by governments injecting money into the global economy to soften the financial blow of the coronavirus.
Much of the jump in wealth came in the first year of the pandemic.
It then plateaued and has since dropped a bit, said Max Lawson, head of inequality policy at Oxfam.
At the same time, Covid-19, growing inequality and rising food prices could push as many as 263 million people into extreme poverty this year, reversing decades of progress, Oxfam said in a report released last month.
“I’ve never seen such a dramatic growth in poverty and growth in wealth at the same moment in history,” Lawson said.
“It’s going to hurt a lot of people.”
Benefiting from high prices
Consumers around the world are contending with the soaring cost of energy and food, but corporations in these industries and their leaders are benefiting from the rise in prices, Oxfam said.
Billionaires in the food and agribusiness sector have seen their total wealth increase by $382 billion, or 45%, over the past two years, after adjusting for inflation.
Some 62 food billionaires were created since 2020.
Meanwhile, the net worth of their peers in the oil, gas and coal sectors jumped by $53 billion, or 24%, since 2020, after adjusting for inflation.
Forty new pandemic billionaires were created in the pharmaceutical industry, which has been at the forefront of the battle against Covid-19 and the beneficiary of billions in public funding.
The tech sector has spawned many billionaires, including seven of the 10 world’s richest people, such as Telsa’s Elon Musk, Amazon’s Jeff Bezos and Microsoft’s Bill Gates.
These men increased their wealth by $436 billion to $934 billion over the past two years, after adjusting for inflation.
Tax the rich
To counter the meteoric growth in inequality and help those struggling with the rise in prices, Oxfam is pushing governments to tax the wealthy and corporations.
It is calling for a temporary 90% tax on excess corporate profits, as well as a one-time tax on billionaires’ wealth.
The group would also like to levy a permanent wealth tax on the super-rich.
It suggests a 2% tax on assets greater than $5 million, rising to 5% for net worth above $1 billion.
This could raise $2.5 trillion worldwide.
Wealth taxes, however, have not been embraced by many governments.
Efforts to levy taxes on the net worth of the richest Americans have failed to advance in Congress in recent years.
PROVIDENCE, R.I. (AP) — After mass shootings killed and wounded people grocery shopping, going to church and simply living their lives last weekend, the nation marked a milestone of 1 million deaths from COVID-19.
The number, once unthinkable, is now an irreversible reality in the United States — just like the persistent reality of gun violence that kills tens of thousands of people every year.
Americans have always tolerated high rates of death and suffering — among certain segments of society.
But the sheer numbers of deaths from preventable causes, and the apparent acceptance that no policy change is on the horizon, raises the question: Has mass death become accepted in America?
“I think the evidence is unmistakable and quite clear.
We will tolerate an enormous amount of carnage, suffering and death in the U.S., because we have over the past two years.
We have over our history,” says Gregg Gonsalves, an epidemiologist and professor at Yale who, before that, was a leading member of the AIDS advocacy group ACT UP.
“If I thought the AIDS epidemic was bad, the American response to COVID-19 has sort of ...
it’s a form of the American grotesque, right?”
Gonsalves says.
“Really — a million people are dead?
And you’re going to talk to me about your need to get back to normal, when for the most part most of us have been living pretty reasonable lives for the past six months?”
Certain communities have always borne the brunt of higher death rates in the United States.
There are profound racial and class inequalities in the United States, and our tolerance of death is partly based on who is at risk, says Elizabeth Wrigley-Field, a sociology professor at the University of Minnesota who studies mortality.
“Some people’s deaths matter a lot more than others,” she laments.
“And I think that’s what we’re seeing in this really brutal way with this coincidence of timing.”
In Buffalo, the alleged shooter was a racist bent on killing as many Black people as he could, according to authorities.
The family of 86-year-old Ruth Whitfield, one of 10 people killed there in an attack on a grocery store that served the African American community, channeled the grief and frustration of millions as they demanded action, including passage of a hate crime bill and accountability for those who spread hateful rhetoric.
“You expect us to keep doing this over and over and over again — over again, forgive and forget,” her son, former Buffalo Fire Commissioner Garnell Whitfield, Jr., told reporters.
“While people we elect and trust in offices around this country do their best not to protect us, not to consider us equal.”
That sense — that politicians have done little even as the violence repeats itself – is shared by many Americans.
It’s a dynamic that’s encapsulated by the “thoughts and prayers” offered to victims of gun violence by politicians unwilling to make meaningful commitments to ensure there really is no more “never again,” according to Martha Lincoln, an anthropology professor at San Francisco State University who studies the cultural politics of public health.
“I don’t think that most Americans feel good about it.
I think most Americans would like to see real action from their leaders in the culture about these pervasive issues,” says Lincoln, who adds that there is a similar “political vacuum” around COVID-19.
The high numbers of deaths from COVID-19, guns and other causes are difficult to fathom and can start to feel like background noise, disconnected from the individuals whose lives were lost and the families whose lives were forever altered.
With COVID-19, American society has even come to accept the deaths of children from a preventable cause.
In a recent guest column published in The Advocate newspaper, pediatrician Dr. Mark W. Kline pointed out that more than 1,500 children have died from COVID-19, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, despite the “myth” that it is harmless for children.
Kline wrote that there was a time in pediatrics when “children were not supposed to die.”
“There was no acceptable pediatric body count,” he wrote.
“At least, not before the first pandemic of the social media age, COVID-19, changed everything.”
There are many parallels between the U.S. response to COVID-19 and its response to the gun violence epidemic, says Sonali Rajan, a professor at Columbia University who researches school violence.
“We have long normalized mass death in this country.
Gun violence has persisted as a public health crisis for decades,” she says, noting that an estimated 100,000 people are shot every year and some 40,000 will die.
Gun violence is such a part of life in America now that we organize our lives around its inevitability.
Children do lockdown drills at school.
And in about half the states, Rajan says, teachers are allowed to carry firearms.
When she looks at the current response to COVID-19, she sees similar dynamics.
Americans, she says, “deserve to be able to commute to work without getting sick, or work somewhere without getting sick, or send their kids to school without them getting sick.”
“What will happen down the line if more and more people get sick and are disabled?”
she asks.
“What happens?
Do we just kind of live like this for the foreseeable future?”
It’s important, she says, to ask what policies are being put forth by elected officials who have the power to “attend to the health and the well-being of their constituents.”
“It’s remarkable how that responsibility has been sort of abdicated, is how I would describe it,” Rajan says.
The level of concern about deaths often depends on context, says Rajiv Sethi, an economics professor at Barnard College who has written about both gun violence and COVID-19.
He points to a rare but dramatic event such as an airplane crash or an accident at a nuclear power plant, which do seem to matter to people.
By contrast, something like traffic deaths gets less attention.
The government this week said that nearly 43,000 people had died on the nation’s roads last year, the highest level in 16 years.
The federal government unveiled a national strategy earlier this year to combat the problem.
Even when talking about gun violence, the Buffalo shooting has gotten a lot of attention, but mass shootings represent a small number of the gun deaths that happen in the United States every year, Sethi says.
For example, there are more suicides from guns in America than there are homicides, an estimated 24,000 gun suicides compared with 19,000 homicides.
But even though there are policy proposals that could help within the bounds of the Second Amendment, he says, the debate on guns is politically entrenched.
“The result is that nothing is done,” Sethi says.
“The result is paralysis.”
Dr. Megan Ranney of Brown University’s School of Public Health calls it a frustrating “learned helplessness.”
“There’s been almost a sustained narrative created by some that tells people that these things are inevitable,” says Ranney, an ER doctor who did gun violence research before COVID-19 hit.
“It divides us when people think that there’s nothing they can do.”
She wonders if people really understand the sheer numbers of people dying from guns, from COVID-19 and from opioids.
The CDC said this month that more than 107,000 Americans died of drug overdoses in 2021, setting a record.
Ranney also points to false narratives spread by bad actors, such as denying that the deaths were preventable, or suggesting those who die deserved it.
There is an emphasis in the United States on individual responsibility for one’s health, Ranney says — and a tension between the individual and the community.
“It’s not that we put less value on an individual life, but rather we’re coming up against the limits of that approach,” she says.
“Because the truth is, is that any individual’s life, any individual’s death or disability, actually affects the larger community.”
Similar debates happened in the last century about child labor laws, worker protections and reproductive rights, Ranney says.
An understanding of history is important, says Wrigley-Field, who teaches the history of ACT UP in one of her classes.
During the AIDS crisis in the 1980s, the White House press secretary made anti-gay jokes when asked about AIDS, and everyone in the room laughed.
Activists were able to mobilize a mass movement that forced people to change the way they thought and forced politicians to change the way they operated, she says.
“I don’t think that those things are off the table now.
It’s just that it’s not really clear if they’re going to emerge,” Wrigley-Field says.
“I don’t think giving up is a permanent state of affairs.
But I do think that’s where we’re at, right at this moment.”
___
Michelle R. Smith is an Associated Press reporter, based in Providence.
Follow her on Twitter at twitter.com/mrsmithap
What is long covid?
For the first time, a new study defines it.
The findings are expected to help standardize the definition of long covid and influence how the condition is diagnosed and studied
We investigated the anti-COVID-19 post-vaccine response in terms of serum and salivary antibodies, serum virus neutralizing activity and the cellular immune response in matched samples of health care workers who were immunized with two doses of the CoronaVac vaccine who have had (REC/VAC) or did not have (VAC) previous COVID-19.
Serum antibodies were quantified using an assay to recognize IgG antibodies anti-trimeric spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2, which improves the detection of a broader repertoire of neutralizing antibodies.
Importantly, since there is now evidence of neutralizing antibodies as a protective correlate for COVID-19 vaccines18, we also performed assays to evaluate the ability of these serum samples to neutralize viral activity directly.
Our results showed that CoronaVac immunization was able to induce the production of anti-trimeric spike antibodies in most vaccinated donors.
Likewise, in individuals who were previously infected with SARS-CoV-2, vaccination boosted the immune response, significantly increasing antibody levels.
These data were reinforced by the results of the virus neutralization test, whose percentage of positivity, although slightly reduced compared to antibody quantification, showed a similar response profile in the assays against the reference B strain, with higher VNT values and percentages of positive responses in the REC/VAC group than in the VAC group.
Muena et al. 19 observed that the antibody neutralizing activity was significantly boosted in seropositive individuals after two doses of the CoronaVac or BNT162b2 vaccines, regardless of the time elapsed since COVID-19 symptoms onset.
Interestingly, this boost induced by vaccination in COVID-19-recovered individuals is related to the stimulation of B-cell clones.
Since these cells retain a large viral repertoire from infection over time, a notable expansion of broad antibodies after vaccination was observed, even with vaccines only based on spike protein, as in mRNA-based vaccines20.
The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants have raised significant concern, since potentially more infectious and transmissible variants may emerge harboring mutations in the major targeting of neutralizing antibodies, the viral S protein, that can compromise the effectiveness of vaccination programs4.
Considering that the first generation of vaccines was developed based on the ancestral strain, which did not have mutations, it is relevant to evaluate the neutralizing antibodies of recovered and/or vaccinated individuals against these variants.
In this context, the samples were also evaluated for neutralizing activity against two SARS-CoV-2 variants, Gamma and Delta, in addition to the B reference strain.
We observed a reduction in both VNT values and the proportion of samples presenting positive VNT values against the variants, compared to the reference strain.
Additionally, these reductions were more pronounced in samples from the VAC group than in the REC/VAC group.
These data suggest that although infection- and vaccine-induced immunity can be at least partially retained, Gamma and Delta variants could escape neutralization by antibodies stimulated by the vaccination.
Additionally, in previously infected individuals, a boost induced by vaccination seems to be capable of reducing this escape.
A reduction in the potency of neutralizing ability against SARS-CoV-2 variants by antibodies elicited by natural infection or vaccination has been reported.
Through a systematic review of data and pooled analysis, Chen et al. 17 found that Beta, Gamma and Delta strains significantly escape neutralization mediated by natural infection, while neutralizing titres against the Alpha variant are slightly decreased.
However, for antibody neutralization induced by vaccination, it seems that the immunity induced against variants could depend on the vaccine platform.
For mRNA-based vaccine platforms, the Beta variant had the most reduced sensitivity and Alpha, Gamma and Delta showed an intermediate phenotype21, while for viral vector-based vaccine platforms, reduced protection against Beta and Delta variants was observed22.
Particularly for virus inactivated-based immunization, the Gamma variant can escape from neutralizing antibodies, even after two vaccine doses of CoronaVac, presenting a reduction of approximately 3 times compared to the ancestral strain23.
In fact, another study comparing the performance of serum derived from CoronaVac vaccinated individuals against the Alpha and Gamma variants showed a reduction of approximately 4.1 times for Alpha and 7.5 times for Gamma variants, compared to the ancestral strain and the decrease in the neutralization titre in relation to the Alpha variant was 1.8 times for Gamma24.
CoronaVac was also capable of inducing the production of salivary IgG and, to a lesser extent, salivary IgA directed to the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.
While the detection of salivary IgG was specific, IgA tests showed a low specificity.
In addition, a low sensitivity in detecting salivary IgA in COVID-19 patients was reported by Isho et al. 25, who observed a sensitivity assay of approximately 50, while IgG test sensitivity was greater than 80%.
Guerrieri et al. 26, using the same technique, and Varadhachary et al. 27, using a different approach, also showed a large variation in the salivary IgA titre in pre-vaccinated and pre-COVID-19 saliva samples, although they found significantly lower levels compared to those observed in COVID-19 vaccinated and COVID-19 PCR-confirmed individuals, respectively.
In this regard, Tsukinoki et al. 28 found SARS-CoV-2 cross-reactive sIgA antibodies to spike protein in the saliva of 46.7% of donors who were PCR- and IgM-negative for COVID-19.
These results, as in ours, suggest the presence of polyreactive sIgA which can cross-react with a number of antigens, through its N-linked glycan chains, acting as a natural antibody that promptly neutralizes pathogenic microorganism entry at mucosal surfaces29.
It is important to emphasize that in saliva, IgA is the most abundant immunoglobulin, and it is primarily produced in salivary glands by local plasma cells primed at mucosal sites and exported by the polymeric Ig receptor (pIgR), unlike salivary IgG, which is primarily derived from serum by passive diffusion through gingival clefts, although some is locally produced30.
These different sources of salivary IgG and IgA antibodies may explain the better salivary IgG response to the CoronaVac vaccine compared to IgA because any previous contact with the virus could elicit a response by mucosal B lymphocytes, inducing the production of secretory IgA antibodies without generating apparent clinical symptoms.
In addition, there are several potential O-linked sites in the hinge region of SIgA antibodies that protect the IgA hinge region from proteases and the secretory component, with its highly glycosylated nature, also has the ability to bind to antigens non-specifically31,32.
Additionally, it is important to consider the kinetics of the production and persistence of saliva antibodies.
In infected individuals, the peak of salivary IgA production was approximately two weeks after diagnosis, with a rapid decrease after nine weeks, whereas IgG antibodies showed a peak approximately 8 weeks after diagnosis and remained stable until 10 weeks33.
Reinforcing these data, Ketas et al. 34 showed that individuals who received mRNA-based vaccines presented IgA production two weeks after the second vaccine dose.
Our samples were collected approximately eight weeks after vaccination, which might have favoured IgG over IgA detection.
Salivary IgG presented similar levels in individuals vaccinated with and without previous COVID-19, unlike those from serum IgG. These different profiles were evidenced by a heatmap analysis (Fig. 5), in which the difference between salivary and serum IgG profiles in VAC individuals was clear.
In addition, previous contact with the virus does not seem to change the IgG salivary response.
Since saliva IgG is primarily derived from serum by passive diffusion30, it would be expected that the saliva reflects the serum content.
In this context, our results suggest that CoronaVac also induced the production of IgG antibodies by local immune cells.
Corroborating this fact, the analysis between serum and salivary IgG antibody levels from both VAC and REC/VAC showed no correlation between these data (Supplementary Fig.
S2G,H), reinforcing that after vaccination, salivary IgG does not correspond to the serum profile.
Consistent with these data, the authors have found only a moderate correlation with paired and saliva antibody titres in samples from mRNA-based vaccines recipients34,35.
The mucosa and draining lymph nodes of the oropharyngeal tract are one of the entry routes of SARS-CoV-2 in the body, representing an important site for the anti-SARS-CoV-2 immune response initiation25.
Thus, the presence of specific antibodies in mucosa might prevent or limit virus access through this route34, emphasizing the importance of investigating the response in this immune compartment.
Although our results cannot be extrapolated to represent protection at this potential site of infection, these findings encourage further investigation about the effect of the vaccine in mucosa sites.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first description of salivary evaluation after immunization with a virus-based vaccine.
An important issue when analysing the immune response after natural infection or vaccination is the durability of the anti-SARS-CoV-2 immune response, which is necessary to promote protective immunity.
Memory T and B cells are crucial for long-term protection, particularly specific CD4+ T cells, which elicit a potent B-cell response for antibody affinity maturation36.
In fact, a decline in circulating antibody titres has been observed a few months after infection or vaccination12,13,14.
However, sustained T-cell immunity is reported even in the absence of antibodies15,16, suggesting that the cellular response also plays an important role in protective immunity.
The cellular response to inactivated virus-based vaccines has been evaluated in few studies.
CoronaVac was able to induce robust circulating and memory B-cell and T-cell responses approximately ten weeks after the second dose37.
In addition, CoronaVac was able to induce a predominant CD4+ T-cell immune response polarized towards a Th1 profile after stimulation with a mega pool of specific peptides38.
We were also able to find a greater number of CD4+ T-cells producing IFN-γ than CD8+ T-cells.
This observation can be attributed to the OPPs used in our assay, the 15-mer length of which favours the antigenic presentation through MHC class II for CD4+ T cells activation.
Concomitantly, we found higher levels of cellular response in vaccinated individuals with previous SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to COVID-19-naïve vaccinated individuals, showing that cellular response, as well as humoral response, is also boosted by vaccination in previously infected individuals.
Similar results were verified in cohorts immunized with mRNA-based vaccines.
Individuals with prior infection showed enhanced T-cell immunity after only one39 or two doses40 of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine compared to individuals immunized without previous exposure.
It is important to consider that IFN-γ T-cell production is not necessarily related to protection against infection.
Furthermore, the durability of immunity due to vaccination, as well as vaccination after natural infection, requires monitoring over time41.
To analyze all the data in an integrated way, heatmaps were generated to elucidate some differences and similarities among the groups (VAC, REC/VAC, and UI/UV) and variables (serum IgG, salivary IgA and IgG, and IFN-γ CD3+).
The data generated there showed that the REC/VAC group showed more intense positive responses, for a greater number of variables compared to the VAC group, suggesting that vaccination may have worked as a booster, reinforcing the anti-SARS-CoV-2 immune response.
Regarding the UI/UV group, we observed that some individuals had salivary IgA production specific for SARS-CoV-2 and IFN-γ production in response to stimulation with specific peptides, although they did not present a positive PCR test, positive IgG serology, or reported symptoms of COVID-19.
In addition to the possibility of low test specificity, a possible explanation would be that the presence of IgA or T-cell response could reflect a viral exposure that did not result in systemic infection but was sufficient to trigger a mucosal or cellular memory response34,42.
Our study has several limitations.
First, the study population was mostly composed of female individuals.
Second, the negative control group (UI/UV) was composed of younger volunteers compared to the VAC and REC/VAC groups.
Third, the saliva collection time for IgA analysis seems not to have been ideal for peak response analysis.
Fourth, analyses of some immune components could not be performed, either due to the lack of samples or assay limitations, which did not allow for integrated analyses using all the samples.
Lastly, our study lacked a control group composed of unvaccinated recovered COVID-19 individuals, which could clarify the role of the CoronaVac vaccine in the profile of salivary IgG production.
In conclusion, our study provides evidence that the CoronaVac vaccine was able to induce serum and saliva IgG directed to SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, serum neutralizing activity against the reference SARS-CoV-2 strain and IFN-γ production by T cells stimulated with specific peptides.
Additionally, previously COVID-19 infected individuals presented an increased response for all variables investigated compared to vaccinated uninfected individuals.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first description of the immune profile, including neutralizing activity against SARS-CoV-2 variants, in previously infected individuals immunized with a virus inactivated-based vaccine.
Image
By: Robert M. Califf, M.D., Commissioner of Food and Drugs and Hilary Marston, M.D., M.P.H., Chief Medical Officer
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services is planning for the federal Public Health Emergency for COVID-19 declared under the Public Health Service Act to expire on May 11, 2023.
We’ve arrived at this point because of the U.S. government’s historic investments and our collective efforts to mitigate COVID-19’s worst impacts.
While the HHS public health emergency is ending, COVID-19 remains a high priority and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration will remain engaged with numerous activities to protect and promote public health.
And while the virus is still with us, causing illness and death in some cases, the good news is we now have more tools to help protect many in our families and communities from the most harmful impacts of COVID-19.
COVID-19 vaccines are one of the most significant and important public health interventions we have access to, and the available data continue to demonstrate that vaccines prevent the most serious outcomes of COVID-19, including severe illness, hospitalization, and death.
We also have hundreds of tests and several authorized and approved treatment options for COVID-19.
The FDA remains committed to continuing to use every tool in our toolbox to fight COVID-19, including pivoting as the virus adapts and continuing to help advance medical products to protect the most vulnerable populations.
The agency will continue to support efforts on future COVID-19 vaccine and treatment needs.
Staying up to date on COVID-19 vaccination is the best thing Americans can do to help protect themselves and their families.
The COVID-19 vaccines, therapeutics and medical devices that are authorized will not change as a result of the public health emergency ending in May.
The agency may continue to issue new Emergency Use Authorizations (EUAs) if the criteria for issuance are met and if the situation warrants it.
Moreover, existing EUAs will remain in place as appropriate and the agency will review marketing submissions for approval, licensure, de novo classification, or clearance.
Importantly, we are continuing efforts to understand and support treatments for Long COVID.
The agency recently hosted a virtual public meeting on Patient-Focused Drug Development for Long COVID.
This meeting provided us the opportunity to obtain initial input from patients about their experiences with Long COVID, including how Long COVID affects daily life, symptoms that matter most to patients, and current approaches to treating Long COVID.
We are also funding research in this area.
As we reflect on the devastating losses and lasting impacts the COVID-19 pandemic has had worldwide, we will use the lessons we’ve learned to be thoughtful about preparing for future public health emergencies and use the knowledge gained from our experience with COVID-19 to inform our future response efforts.
Anticipating Misinformation and Disinformation
One area we at the FDA feel passionately about is the need to do more to address the misinformation and disinformation that has become more prevalent and is undermining confidence in science and public health and weakening trust in governmental and other institutions, including the FDA.
As we think about emergency preparedness, we’d be remiss not to mention the need to get in front of what we know can happen when tackling a public health crisis.
Misinformation, spreading largely through social media, is leading people to make adverse choices regarding their health, from continuing to use tobacco products or vape, turning to unproven products, or failing to use medicines and vaccines that have substantial data showing benefit, such as FDA-approved and authorized vaccines and antivirals that are available for COVID-19.
Addressing misinformation will require a true collaborative effort to build trust in science that goes well beyond the FDA – involving the development of a proactive network that includes not just our federal partners, but regulated industry, health systems and clinicians and universities, along with public health and advocacy groups.
FDA’s Public Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Mission
The Administration’s National Biodefense Strategy and Implementation Plan on Countering Biological Threats, Enhancing Pandemic Preparedness, and Achieving Global Health Security describes in detail a set of transformative capabilities the U.S. government aims to build to defend against future pandemics and biological threats.
These include the capability to develop and safely deploy medical countermeasures against novel pathogens much more rapidly than is possible today.
These capabilities will require additional resources and scientific breakthroughs.
The FDA has long played a key role in this effort, to make sure that medical countermeasures can be rapidly and rigorously validated for pandemic response.
Preparation for future public health emergencies depends on utilizing the many strategies—often decades in the making—that led to a successful COVID-19 response as well as the establishment and refinement of authorities and flexibilities that allow the agency to identify and mitigate risks while promoting innovation.
This includes continuing to leverage existing relationships with entities outside of the FDA in emergency response situations.
The agency’s capacity to drive future emergency responses depends on continued collaborations with regulatory, academic, state, tribal, local, territorial, and industry partners even in the absence of a crisis.
Next Steps and Planning for the Future
The FDA will continue to improve the capabilities of the agency and prepare to effectively address future crises such as public health emergencies, supply chain disruptions, geopolitical changes, and natural disasters.
For example, the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted vulnerabilities in medical product supply chains, in part due to unprecedented global demand for products and their raw materials.
The agency has intervened and established new or more comprehensive programs to help address this.
These efforts will continue as we position the agency to tackle future public health emergencies by:
Monitoring the availability of medical products by integrating data from a wide variety of mandatory and voluntary reporting sources such as commercially available data sets, product manufacturers, raw material and component suppliers, active ingredient manufacturers, group purchasing organizations, distributors, suppliers and end-users, like hospitals, providers, and pharmacies.
Predicting supply chain vulnerabilities and risks by integrating internal and external data sets for analysis using artificial intelligence, including natural language processing and machine learning.
Preventing or mitigating shortages with strategies such as shelf-life extensions, expedited review of manufacturing supplements and generic drug applications, exercising temporary enforcement discretion for new sources of medically necessary drugs, and requesting that manufacturers establish risk management plans to mitigate the potential for shortages, as appropriate.
The FDA is also initiating a new inspection planning system that will be more efficient, transparent and adaptable to changing needs.
This will help prioritize high-impact inspections such as those for facilities manufacturing critical products.
The FDA has returned to its pre-pandemic inspection procedures and as a result the majority of the domestic inspections are unannounced.
Building a workflow management system will provide a single source of data and real-time access to information to support the best regulatory decisions.
The FDA also is developing new approaches to inspect facilities utilizing novel advanced manufacturing techniques.
There have been lessons learned about how the FDA’s authorities could be modernized in the reauthorization of the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act to ensure our actions could be even more effective.
Providing greater transparency into supply chains to improve resiliency and prevent and mitigate shortages of medical products and the food supply, ensuring operational readiness and surge capacity within the FDA inspectorate and review staff, and improving laboratory testing regulation are priorities that will enhance national security and improve public health preparedness.
As an agency, we remain committed to planning for the future, taking into account the many important lessons learned from the COVID-19 public health emergency.
North Carolina COVID-19 cases increase but experts don't expect return of masking, closures
Ahead of the back-to-school season, doctors are urging families to take precautions now to ward off respiratory viruses.
Ahead of the back-to-school season, doctors are urging families to take precautions now to ward off respiratory viruses.
Ahead of the back-to-school season, doctors are urging families to take precautions now to ward off respiratory viruses.
Ahead of the back-to-school season, doctors are urging families to take precautions now to ward off respiratory viruses.
RALEIGH, N.C. (WTVD) -- Ahead of the back-to-school season, doctors are urging families to take precautions now to ward off respiratory viruses.
COVID-19 metrics are seeing an uptick in North Carolina.
More than 26 million virus particles were found in North Carolina wastewater last week; six times more than the amount detected two months ago, according to data from the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services (NCDHHS).
The number of patients admitted to a hospital for COVID-19 is also increasing.
More than 400 patients were admitted statewide; this is the sixth week of increase and the highest number of patients since March.
Despite the recent uptick, the state's metrics remain significantly lower than last August -- when the state had 1,259 COVID-19 patients in the hospital.
SEE ALSO | New COVID-19 variant EG.5 emerges as cases of the virus increase in North Carolina
COVID-19 cases are increasing in North Carolina and across the country.
The presence of the virus in wastewater has increased by five-fold.
North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services State Epidemiologist Dr. Zack Moore said this increase isn't surprising and he doesn't predict any stricter restrictions will be put in place.
"We know COVID is going to rise and fall, but the big difference now is that we have effective tools to manage that, more like we manage other respiratory viruses, flu, etc.," Moore said.
The state is still only detecting a handful of flu and RSV cases.
The latest data showed 14 people were admitted to the hospital last week for the flu.
NCDHHS data also shows the number of people arriving at the emergency department with flu and RSV symptoms has remained low for months.
"I think the thing to do is do everything you can now to prepare yourself be ready when those viruses hit so that we don't end up in a situation where we have a lot more illness and where our hospitals and health care system get stretched again," Moore recommended.
A new COVID-19 vaccine is expected out this fall, but the exact timeline is still unknown.
The vaccine is designed to better target Omicron variants.
SEE ALSO |
CDC reveals new vaccine recommendations for COVID-19, flu, RSV
The CDC has made some slight changes to its recommendations for vaccinations related to COVID-19, flu, and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).
"When they're going back to school.
Vaccinations are, of course, the best line of defense that we have for COVID and influenza.
So if you have kids who haven't had the COVID vaccinations yet, we would encourage that," Moore said.
Moore suggested anyone who is at high risk or has a high-risk family member get a COVID-19 booster now rather than waiting for the updated version.
For everyone else, he recommends waiting for the updated version.
As for Flu vaccines, Josef's Pharmacy manager Jonathan Harward said they have started to get some doses of vaccines but are still waiting on double doses.
The CDC recommends people get flu vaccines in September or October.
"We haven't seen much flu yet, so I think there's still plenty of time there for people to protect themselves," Moore said.
RSV vaccines for people 60 years and up are also expected out soon.
"We spoke with our vaccine distributor yesterday and we're hopeful to be able to have that in the next month or so," Harward said.
He said it is still too soon to know just how severe this respiratory season will be, so he recommends everyone prepare now.
Moore also recommends people stock up on COVID-19 tests now and stay home if they detect any symptoms.
For more vaccine recommendations and guidelines click here.
Before she came down with COVID in March 2020, Rebekah Stein was able to enjoy a handful of alcoholic drinks a week.
She assumed nothing had changed after her mild infection, so when she saw her husband holding an enticing glass of whiskey one night, she took a tiny sip.
Within a minute, severe chest pain kicked in, and Stein, 30, became so drunk it felt like she had downed several drinks at once.
The next day was worse, but it wasn’t your average hangover: She had an irregular heartbeat, chest pain, cough, sore throat, headache, and stuffy nose.
It was “basically COVID relapse,” said Stein, who’s also dealing with other long COVID symptoms, including shortness of breath, regular fevers, full body aches, and exhaustion.
“When this was first occurring, I hadn’t connected the dots.
I would wake up and take a COVID test because I had all the COVID symptoms, and when I drink my heart rate gets really high overnight,” Stein said.
“My body seems to know it’s being poisoned pretty quickly.”
Nearly three years later, Stein still cannot drink alcohol of any kind.
And she isn’t alone.
Post-COVID alcohol intolerance has not been studied yet, so no one knows how common it actually is, but interviews with doctors, researchers, and people who are no longer able to drink alcohol suggest it’s yet another mysterious symptom that could be a side effect of the viral infection.
Long COVID, also known as post-COVID conditions , occurs when health problems last for weeks, months or even years after a coronavirus infection.
It was recognized by the American With Disabilities Act in 2021 and roughly 30% of adults may experience at least one COVID symptom that lasts three months or more, according to research.
Dr. Stuart Malcolm, an internal medicine physician who solely treats long COVID patients at the RTHM clinic, said many people with long COVID have given up alcohol entirely “because it seems to universally not make people feel well.”
But he estimates that about 5% to 10% of his patients (or about 10 to 20 people in his practice) are experiencing this intolerance as they continue to experiment with alcohol consumption.
A neurologist with long COVID in Louisiana also wrote about her experience with it in a March 2021 blog post, and a Reddit thread from last February revealed more people dealing with the same problem.
Alcohol intolerance can happen even to those who aren’t experiencing long COVID, may disappear or become less severe with time, and can be triggered by specific types of alcohol but not others.
Although inconvenient, not being able to drink alcohol isn't the most earth-shattering of symptoms compared with more serious effects.
Still, experts, particularly those who study or treat people with ME/CFS (myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome) — a complex illness that shares many similarities with long COVID — aren’t too shocked to hear about the occurrence.
Alcohol intolerance is actually a key diagnostic feature of ME/CFS .
Studies have found that it shows up in anywhere between 65% to 80% of people with the illness.
“It doesn't surprise me at all because we now know there are all sorts of underlying biological abnormalities in people with ME/CFS that involve the immune system, energy metabolism, brain, autonomic nervous system, and microbiome of the gut, most of which now are showing up in people with long COVID,” said Dr. Anthony Komaroff, a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School who has studied ME/CFS for 35 years.
“But what specifically the abnormalities are that lead to alcohol intolerance we don't know yet.”
What is alcohol intolerance?
Alcohol intolerance is generally an inherited metabolic disorder that prevents people from processing alcohol the way other people do; a genetic mutation makes a specific enzyme, or protein, less efficient at converting alcohol into a non-toxic substance, causing a buildup of toxins in the blood.
As a result, people’s face, neck, and chest become flushed — warm and pink or red in color — almost immediately after drinking alcohol.
They may also experience stuffy nose, nausea, vomiting, rapid heartbeat, low blood pressure, headache, diarrhea, and worsening asthma.
The condition doesn’t go away, but people can manage it by avoiding booze of all kinds.
People of Asian descent are more likely to have the genetic mutation, so they have the condition at greater rates compared with other racial groups.
Although it might feel like it, alcohol intolerance doesn’t make people get drunk faster, and it doesn’t increase blood alcohol levels.
The condition is also different from an alcohol allergy, which is an immune response to a chemical, grain, or preservative in alcohol that can cause rashes, itchiness, swelling, and stomach cramps.
Both conditions can cause nausea, but an alcohol allergy is typically more painful and can be life-threatening if untreated.
When it’s related to long COVID or another chronic condition, however, alcohol intolerance likely harms the body through a different chemical mechanism that doesn’t involve an inherited genetic mutation or allergy, Komaroff said.
It’s also possible the coronavirus may directly affect the enzymes responsible for processing alcohol, said Dr. Vikrant Rachakonda, a hepatologist, gastroenterologist, and professor of medicine at UC Davis Health.
But that remains to be seen.
Why do some people have alcohol intolerance after COVID?
There are several plausible explanations behind post-COVID alcohol intolerance, but it has not been thoroughly studied.
Most speculations are based on what scientists have learned about long COVID’s impacts on the body and research on ME/CFS.
Given how complex long COVID is, it’s unlikely that just one of these theories can fully explain what’s going on.
Here are three of the main ones, according to experts.
Liver damage
The liver processes everything we consume, including alcohol, so when the organ is injured or weakened in any way, it becomes vulnerable to further injury when exposed to toxins, like alcohol, Komaroff said.
COVID can injure the liver in more ways than one, and some experts, like Malcolm, the long COVID doctor, suspects the disease causes “a little bit more injury to the liver than we thought that’s not apparent in standard lab tests.
"
That’s all to say that an injured liver — or an undiagnosed liver disease, which Rachakonda says is very common because most cases are symptomless — likely won’t process alcohol as it should.
It’s possible that people who cannot tolerate alcohol after COVID may have sustained an acute liver injury from their infection or have an undiagnosed liver condition.
Rachakonda said it’s not unreasonable to request a blood test if you’re experiencing alcohol intolerance.
Checking your liver enzymes, as well as your kidney function and electrolytes, can help rule out any other causes.
Mast cell activation
Mast cells are a type of immune cell that cause allergic reactions when they detect an allergen like proteins from peanuts.
They do this by releasing a chemical called histamine, which works to get rid of the allergen by making you itchy, sneeze, nauseous, short of breath, etc.
(Komaroff actually suspects alcohol intolerance post-COVID might even be a “kind of allergic reaction.”)
Studies show that long COVID exacerbates this process by activating mast cells, encouraging them to release extra histamine into the body.
(ME/CFS also does this.)
It can mimic the symptoms of mast cell activation syndrome , a condition that causes people to have repeated episodes of anaphylaxis-like symptoms, such as hives, low blood pressure, severe diarrhea, and difficulty breathing.
(Anaphylaxis is a potentially life-threatening allergic reaction.)
Making matters worse, alcohol not only contains histamine — it’s a byproduct of the fermentation and brewing process — but it also pushes mast cells to release more of it and then blocks an enzyme called the DAO enzyme from breaking histamine down.
“It’s kind of a triple whammy,” Malcolm said.
All the extra histamine may explain why some people feel terrible after drinking alcohol post-COVID.
This theory can also help explain why alcohol intolerance may disappear or become less severe over time.
As your body clears the virus and begins to recover from the injuries it caused, there’s less chaos triggering your mast cells to release extra histamine.
That may be what happened to 26-year-old Serena Quinlan.
When she got COVID in February 2021, she experienced loss of taste and smell for several weeks, which included a weird aversion to foods like onions and guacamole.
However, after some nights out with friends and solo wine nights at home that involved only a couple drinks, Quinlan noticed her body acting as if she had at least eight, she told BuzzFeed News.
“For the rest of that spring and summer, I just really, really struggled if I had one drink.
I would wake up so hungover, terrible headaches, and super tired,” said Quinlan, a law student in Tennessee.
“It was so bizarre.”
Her friend who initially gave her COVID experienced the same symptoms: “She texted me on her own and asked me if I was also dying every time I drank alcohol,” Quinlan said.
After three months, her alcohol intolerance disappeared completely.
Blood flow issues
Many long COVID patients (along with ME/CFS patients) experience issues with their autonomic nervous system, which plays a critical role in how blood vessels constrict and dilate, but researchers don’t yet fully understand why.
When someone has long COVID or ME/CFS, their blood vessels can’t properly respond to signals from the brain to tighten or loosen up.
This is why many people with long COVID feel lightheaded or even faint after standing up, as their blood vessels don’t constrict enough, causing blood pressure to drop.
It’s a hallmark symptom of POTS (postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome), which about 2% to 14% of people who test positive for COVID end up developing .
Now consider alcohol.
Alcohol widens your blood vessels even more, further decreasing blood pressure.
“If you've already got a loose hose that isn't responding to the signal to tighten up and you're making it looser with alcohol, that's going to worsen those symptoms,” including fatigue, rapid heartbeat, cognitive impairment, and more, Malcolm said.
This increased blood flow could also explain the intense body pain some people with long COVID or ME/CFS experience, according to Sarah Annesley, a microbiology senior research fellow at La Trobe University in Australia who studies both conditions.
Julie Harmon knows this sensation all too well.
About a month after getting COVID in December 2020, she began to feel tingling, numbness, aches, and pain throughout her entire body.
It wasn’t until the summer when Harmon, 39, noticed her alcohol intolerance.
A half-hour after drinking one beer, her face would flush and her hands would hurt so much that she couldn’t hold a book or phone, or “do regular daily things,” Harmon told BuzzFeed News.
“My first few drinks, I was like, ‘oh well, this is just my long COVID pain.’
But when I would have a glass of wine with dinner, I'd feel terrible again,” the Arkansas resident said.
“So it finally dawned on me that even small sips of alcoholic drinks were exasperating my symptoms quite a lot.”
Harmon now avoids alcohol entirely.
What to do if you are experiencing alcohol intolerance after COVID
It’s safe to say an intolerance to alcohol isn’t the worst of COVID or long COVID symptoms, but it can take away the “happy” in happy hour and generally impact your social life (if it revolves around alcohol at all).
The good news is that you can avoid alcohol intolerance by avoiding booze altogether.
You’ll also want to avoid drinking alcohol when taking certain medications , as some drugs can worsen symptoms of alcohol intolerance.
Taking antihistamine medication is another no-go because it may hide some symptoms and lead you to drink more.
Otherwise, Malcolm suggests drinking plenty of water to stay hydrated and possibly pursuing some blood work to better understand what may be causing your symptoms.
A low histamine diet could help too, which excludes most fermented products like wine, beer, and cured cheese.
Some other foods to consider avoiding include fish, tomatoes, spinach, citrus fruits, eggs, and chocolate.
But ditching alcohol really is your best bet, Malcolm said: “The hard part is that alcohol is such a social thing, but try to find something else that can help you relax.”
Overview
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic exacerbated pre-existing inequalities in the treatment and care of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs).
This report examines the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on access to NCD medicines, and the policies and strategies implemented by countries and health systems to anticipate and mitigate stresses across NCD medicine supply chains.
The full range of upstream and downstream impacts are investigated, including: manufacturing; procurement, importation and last mile delivery; patient-level effects through affordability and availability; and the effects on NCD medicine availability by category of disease.
The report culminates in recommended actions and interventions for key stakeholders in the NCD pharmaceutical supply chain, including governments, regulatory authorities, manufacturers and the private sector; as well as directions for future research for improving access and supply chain access resilience.
Paxlovid can help alleviate the symptoms of COVID, but there are restrictions on who can get a prescription.
Brontë Wittpenn/The Chronicle
I knew right away that it was going to be bad.
It was a hot, humid night — almost 90 degrees — but my body was freezing.
Putting on a sweatshirt and diving under a blanket couldn’t warm me up.
My head, on the other hand, was on fire.
I had a temperature over 100 degrees and needed ice packs piled on my forehead to cool down.
The coughing wouldn’t stop.
I didn’t need a test to tell me that I had finally caught COVID.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
For more than two years I basically lived like a hermit to avoid just this scenario.
Sure, after getting vaxxed and boosted I didn’t think COVID would kill me.
But I don’t exactly have a gold medal immune system; even a common cold gives me a rough time.
I imagined COVID would lay me out with symptoms that could drag on for weeks or possibly months.
So I stayed away from the office, indoor gatherings and restaurants.
The gym?
No thanks.
Fifteen extra pounds was worth it to avoid getting sick.
But this summer was my sister’s 40th birthday.
She and the rest of my family live on the East Coast and were throwing a big party.
So I decided to leave my cave and fly to see them.
Sure enough, someone else showed up to the festivities quietly sucking cough drops, assuring anyone who asked that her unusually nasal intonation was just a cold.
It wasn’t.
And I was dumb enough to sit right next to her.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
As soon as the first symptoms hit, I knew I was in trouble.
So I decided to do my damnedest to get a prescription for Paxlovid, the antiviral drug cocktail that can prevent the coronavirus from replicating in your body during the early stages of infection.
I wasn’t technically eligible because I’m under 65 without any serious comorbidities.
But having chills, a brutal cough and a sky-high fever had to count for something, right?
Apparently not.
Local pharmacists wouldn’t have anything to do with me.
Neither would urgent care.
I called my health care provider back in San Francisco for a prescription, but it too told me I wasn’t eligible for Paxlovid and had to rest and ride it out.
So ride it out I did for the next 12 days coughing, sweating, snotting and sleeping up to 16 hours a day.
Instead of spending time with my family, I had to avoid them at all costs to keep them from getting sick — other than to beg for food and supplies; there are no delivery services in the rural community they live.
After a wasted vacation, a changed flight and a few extra sick days, I finally got home a couple of weeks ago.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
That same day, my partner started showing symptoms of COVID.
She too was ineligible for Paxlovid and spent the next 10 days hacking away in isolated misery.
She just finally tested negative, but neither of us are back even close to full speed.
A mildly hilly walk in Golden Gate Park the other day had me huffing like I just ran a marathon.
I was in bed by 8:30 that night.
I don’t know for sure which variant laid us out, but, based on infection data, it was almost certainly BA.5.
Now, as BA.4.6 gains ground — and future variants follow — are we going to have to go through all this again if we want to live freely like we did before the pandemic?
Because I don’t have the sick days or the stomach for that.
And I can’t be the only one.
I’m hopeful the new omicron booster can break this cycle.
But what if it doesn’t?
This begs the question: if an antiviral drug like Paxlovid exists that could potentially ease people’s COVID symptoms by preventing the virus from replicating in our bodies before it spreads, why are we being so precious about who we give it to?
A pharmacist in Canada recently refused to fill a Paxlovid prescription for a 20-year-old with Down syndrome and a history of respiratory infections.
How is that sensible public health policy?
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
I asked UCSF infectious disease specialist Monica Gandhi why those of not wanting to feel like garbage for weeks at a time, and who need to work or see vulnerable family members, can’t get easy access to the drug?
We give antivirals widely to ease flu symptoms, why not COVID?
She replied that Paxlovid is currently being used to prevent death and hospitalizations, and that studies of people in my age range have shown no discernible benefits in this regard to taking the drug.
However, “there are other benefits of Paxlovid,” she said.
“You were likely to have felt better sooner if your viral load was brought down more quickly.
But there just have not been any studies on this in vaccinated people.”
My read on this is that even as public health guidance is evolving to tell us COVID is now endemic and we can start getting back to normal, in many unhelpful ways it still treats the virus like a deadly disease.
We can’t have it both ways.
Advertisement Article continues below this ad
Many doctors, Gandhi said, recognize the obvious utility in giving people the chance to recover faster.
Given that the known side effects of Paxlovid are few and mild, some doctors are comfortable bending the rules to prescribe the drug to those who might not technically meet the public health guidance.
That works in America because the feds are currently footing the bill — and they aren’t rigorously checking who does or doesn’t have dire comorbidities.
But Paxlovid is expensive.
And as the federal government cuts off funds and insurance companies start taking on the cost of the drug, you can expect those eligibility requirements to lock in tighter than they are now.
What happens then if the omicron booster shots prove ineffective at preventing breakthrough infections like the one that waylaid me?
Are we willing to let perpetual sickness be the cost of normalcy?
Two common wild plants contain extracts that inhibit the ability of the virus that causes COVID-19 to infect living cells, an Emory University study finds.
Scientific Reports published the results — the first major screening of botanical extracts to search for potency against the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
In laboratory dish tests, extracts from the flowers of tall goldenrod (Solidago altissima) and the rhizomes of the eagle fern (Pteridium aquilinum) each blocked SARS-CoV-2 from entering human cells.
The active compounds are only present in miniscule quantities in the plants.
It would be ineffective, and potentially dangerous, for people to attempt to treat themselves with them, the researchers stress.
In fact, the eagle fern is known to be toxic, they warn.
“It’s very early in the process, but we’re working to identify, isolate and scale up the molecules from the extracts that showed activity against the virus,” says Cassandra Quave, senior author of the study and associate professor in Emory School of Medicine’s Department of Dermatology and the Center for the Study of Human Health.
“Once we have isolated the active ingredients, we plan to further test for their safety and for their long-range potential as medicines against COVID.”
A powerful tool for drug discovery
Quave is an ethnobotanist, studying how traditional people have used plants for medicine to identify promising new candidates for modern-day drugs.
Her lab curates the Quave Natural Product Library, which contains thousands of botanical and fungal natural products extracted from plants collected at sites around the world.
Caitlin Risener, a PhD candidate in Emory’s Molecular and Systems Pharmacology graduate program and the Center for the Study of Human Health, is first author of the current paper.
In previous research to identify potential molecules for the treatment of drug-resistant bacterial infections, the Quave lab focused on plants that traditional people had used to treat skin inflammation.
Given that COVID-19 is a newly emerged disease, the researchers took a broader approach.
They devised a method to rapidly test more than 1,800 extracts and 18 compounds from the Quave Natural Product Library for activity against SARS-CoV-2.
“We’ve shown that our natural products library is a powerful tool to help search for potential therapeutics for an emerging disease,” Risener says.
“Other researchers can adapt our screening method to search for other novel compounds within plants and fungi that may lead to new drugs to treat a range of pathogens.”
Picking the locks on a cell’s surface
SARS-CoV-2 is an RNA virus with a spike protein that can bind to a protein called ACE2 on host cells.
“The viral spike protein uses the ACE2 protein almost like a key going into a lock, enabling the virus to break into a cell and infect it,” Quave explains.
The researchers devised experiments with virus-like particles, or VLPs, of SARS-CoV-2, and cells programmed to overexpress ACE2 on their surface.
The VLPs were stripped of the genetic information needed to cause a COVID-19 infection.
Instead, if a VLP managed to bind to an ACE2 protein and enter a cell, it was programmed to hijack the cell’s machinery to activate a fluorescent green protein.
A plant extract was added to the cells in a petri dish before introducing the viral particles.
By shining a fluorescent light on the dish, they could quickly determine whether the viral particles had managed to enter the cells and activate the green protein.
The researchers identified a handful of hits for extracts that protected against viral entry and then homed in on the ones showing the strongest activity: tall goldenrod and eagle fern.
Both plant species are native to North America and are known for traditional medicinal uses by Native Americans.
Additional experiments showed that the protective power of the plant extracts worked across four variants of SARS-CoV-2: Alpha, theta, delta and gamma.
Confirming the results with infectious virus
To further test these results, the Quave lab collaborated with co-author Raymond Schinazi, Emory professor of pediatrics, director of Emory’s Division of Laboratory of Biochemical Pharmacology and co-director of the HIV Cure Scientific Working Group within the NIH-sponsored Emory University Center for AIDS Research.
A world leader in antiviral development, Schinazi is best known for his pioneering work on breakthrough HIV drugs.
The higher biosecurity rating of the Schinazi lab enabled the researchers to test the two plant extracts in experiments using infectious SARS-CoV-2 virus instead of VLPs.
The results confirmed the ability of the tall goldenrod and eagle fern extracts to inhibit the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to bind to a living cell and infect it.
“Our results set the stage for the future use of natural product libraries to find new tools or therapies against infectious diseases," Quave says.
As a next step, the researchers are working to determine the exact mechanism that enables the two plant extracts to block binding to ACE2 proteins.
A hands-on connection to nature
For Risener, one of the best parts about the project is that she collected samples of tall goldenrod and eagle fern herself.
In addition to gathering medicinal plants from around the globe, the Quave lab also makes field trips to the forests of the Joseph W. Jones Research Center in South Georgia.
The Woodruff Foundation established the center to help conserve one of the last remnants of the unique longleaf pine ecosystem that once dominated the southeastern United States.
“It’s awesome to go into nature to identify and dig up plants,” Risener says.
“That’s something that few graduate students in pharmacology get to do.
I’ll be covered in dirt from head to toe, kneeling on the ground and beaming with excitement and happiness.”
She also assists in preparing the plant extracts and mounting the specimens for the Emory Herbarium.
“When you collect a specimen yourself, and dry and preserve the samples, you get a personal connection,” she says.
“It’s different from someone just handing you a vial of plant material in a lab and saying, ‘Analyze this.’”
After graduating, Risener hopes for a career in outreach and education for science policy surrounding research into natural compounds.
A few of the more famous medicines derived from botanicals include aspirin (from the willow tree), penicillin (from fungi) and the cancer therapy Taxol (from the yew tree).
“Plants have such chemical complexity that humans probably couldn’t dream up all the botanical compounds that are waiting to be discovered,” Risener says.
“The vast medicinal potential of plants highlights the importance of preserving ecosystems.”
Co-authors of the current paper include: Sumin Woo, Tharanga Samarakoon, Marco Caputo and Emily Edwards (the Quave lab and Emory’s Center for the Study of Human Health); Keivan Zandi, Shu Ling Goh and Jessica Downs-Bowen (the Schinazi lab); Kier Klepzig (Joseph W. Jones Research Center); and Wendy Applequist (Missouri Botanical Garden).
Funding for the paper was provided by the Marcus Foundation, the NIH-funded Center for AIDS Research and the NIH National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health.
Many cruise lines dropped COVID-19 vaccine requirements and further eased testing rules in early September.
CDC data show the number of new positive cases following the rule changes.
The numbers did not show a consistent pattern among major lines.
David Hancock spent his September vacation doing things he'd never done.
He went on a cruise for the first time, hugged a sloth at an animal park in Honduras, and at some point during the trip, likely contracted COVID-19.
The 36-year-old firefighter had avoided infection for two years, but tested positive the morning after he and his wife, Melissa, who had been celebrating their 15th wedding anniversary, returned home to Savannah, Tennessee.
But not even COVID-19 could put a damper on their Royal Caribbean International sailing.
"I went all that time since COVID began without getting it ...
so I went and got it on a cruise ship," he told USA TODAY.
Learn more: Best travel insurance
SHANGHAI (AP) — Shanghai authorities say they will take major steps Wednesday toward reopening China’s largest city after a two-month COVID-19 lockdown that has set back the national economy and largely confined millions of people to their homes.
Full bus and subway service will be restored, as will basic rail connections with the rest of China, Vice Mayor Zong Ming said Tuesday at a daily briefing on the city’s outbreak.
READ MORE:
As COVID precautions disappear, other viruses are cropping up in unexpected ways
“The epidemic has been effectively controlled,” she said, adding that the city will start the phase of fully restoring work and life on Wednesday.
Schools will partially reopen on a voluntary basis, and shopping malls, supermarkets, convenience stores and drug stores will reopen gradually at no more than 75 percent of their total capacity.
Cinemas and gyms will remain closed.
Officials, who set June 1 as the target date for reopening earlier in May, appear ready to accelerate what has been a gradual easing in recent days.
A few malls and markets have reopened, and some residents have been given passes allowing them out for a few hours at a time.
In online chat groups, some expressed excitement about the prospect of being able to move about freely in the city for the first time since the end of March, while others remained cautious given the slow pace and stop-and-go nature of opening up so far.
Workers were taking down some of the barriers that have been erected along sidewalks during the lockdown.
A few people walked or biked on the still mostly empty streets.
One man was getting his hair cut on the sidewalk, a common sight in recent days, as a worker or volunteer in full protective clothing looked on.
More than half a million people in the city of 25 million won’t be allowed out Wednesday — 190,000 who are still in lockdown areas and another 450,000 who are in control zones because of recent cases.
Shanghai recorded 29 new cases on Monday, continuing a steady decline from more than 20,000 a day in April.
Li Qiang, the top official from China’s ruling Communist Party in Shanghai, was quoted as saying at a meeting Monday that the city had made major achievements in fighting the outbreak through continuous struggle.
The success came at a price.
Authorities imposed a suffocating citywide lockdown under China’s “zero-COVID” strategy that aims to snuff out any outbreak with mass testing and isolation at centralized facilities of anyone who is infected.
Huge temporary facilities were set up in exhibition centers and other venues to house thousands of people who had tested positive.
Teams of health care and other workers flew in from around the country to help run the massive undertaking.
Factories were shuttered, or were allowed to operate only if workers slept on site to prevent the spread of the virus.
Reduced production at semiconductor plants added to the global chip shortage.
Containers backed up at the port of Shanghai because of a shortage of truck drivers to deliver them to their destinations.
Though it all, leaders of the ruling Communist Party repeatedly expressed a determination to stick to the “zero-COVID” policy even as other countries have opened their borders and are trying to “live with the virus.”
Outside economists widely expect China to fall short of its 5.5 percent growth target for this year.
However, the latest economic data showed that Chinese manufacturing activity started to rebound in May as the government rolled back some containment measures.
Schools will reopen for the final two years of high school and the third year of middle school, but students can decide whether to attend in person.
Other grades and kindergarten remain closed.
Outdoor tourist sites will start reopening Wednesday, with indoor sites set to follow in late June, the Shanghai tourism authority said.
Group tours from other provinces will be allowed again when the city has eliminated all high- and medium-risk pandemic zones.
Beijing, the nation’s capital, further eased restrictions Tuesday in some districts.
The city imposed limited lockdowns, but nothing near a citywide level, in a much smaller outbreak that appears to be on the wane.
Beijing recorded 18 new cases on Monday.
Moritsugu reported from Beijing.
Associated Press researchers Si Chen in Shanghai and Yu Bing in Beijing contributed to this report.
Dataset
All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations.
In this retrospective study, we use the “NYU Langone De-identified COVID-19 database53” collected from patients at the NYU Langone facilities between January 2020 and September 2022.
The COVID-19 De-identified Clinical Database is a de-identified dataset of clinical activity at NYU Langone Health obtained from Epic starting January 1st, 2020.
The data has been stripped of unique identifiers and dates have been shifted by an arbitrary number of days for each patient, which means that these data are not subject to HIPAA restrictions on research use, and thus IRB was exempted.
More information can be found here53.
Data pre-processing
We define inclusion and exclusion criteria.
First, in the case of multiple patient encounters, we use the patient’s most recent encounter.
Then, we include patients who either tested positive for COVID-19 at the facility or were already diagnosed with COVID-19 at the time of their admission.
Next, we include in-patients with vital sign measurements.
The vital signs of these patients, including SpO2, temperature, and HR, are periodically measured and recorded roughly every 4–5 h.
For each patient, age, sex, vaccination status and time, and the presence of comorbidities, including obesity, diabetes, and hypertension, are also recorded.
Similar to previous work (see52 and reference therein), we define deterioration as the occurrence of the composite outcome of mortality, ICU admission, or intubation, i.e., any of the three events.
For patient encounters with several adverse events, we only consider the occurrence of the earliest deterioration event.
It should be noted that if there are multiple deteriorations of the same type (e.g., ICU admission) recorded for a patient more than a week apart, we only consider the latest as the reference time of deterioration for the patient.
For patients who had deteriorated, we extracted vital sign data in the 48 h preceding the time of deterioration.
We use this data to define “positive” windows for each prediction horizon, where \(t=0\) represents the end of the window and \(t=-\,24\) represents the start of the window, such that, for example, in the prediction horizon of 24 h, deterioration would have occurred at \(t=24\).
For patients who did not experience deterioration and were discharged, we use the 48 h window preceding the last vital-sign recording and similarly use those to formulate the “negative” windows.
We exclude all samples containing less than 48 h of vital-sign monitoring, either preceding the deterioration time or discharge time.
To pre-process the time-series data, we first normalize the data using Z-score normalization based on each vital sign’s mean and standard deviation.
Since the vital signs are measured at irregular intervals, we resample each time series to obtain regularly sampled input for the LSTM and TCN networks.
This resampling is done by first interpolating the raw non-uniformly sampled data through cubic spline interpolation and then sampling the interpolated signal every 15 min. In Fig.
1, we show a schematic summarizing the pre-processing of the raw time-series data, which we refer to as the SEQ data.
As for the non-SEQ data, we encode patient sex, vaccination status, hypertension status, and obesity status as binary (0 or 1).
For diabetes status, we use one-hot encoding to represent if a patient is non-diabetic ([1, 0, 0]), diabetic without complications ([0, 1, 0]), or diabetic with complications ([0, 0, 1]).
We grouped the age into 18 different sub-groups and replaced each age with the corresponding age sub-group (value between 1 and 18).
For vaccination time, we count the number of elapsed months between the time of the second COVID-19 vaccination shot and the day of the time of prediction (\(t=0\)).
Figure 1 Data pre-processing pipeline.
We encode the non-SEQ data and pre-process the SEQ data: (i) normalize via Z-score normalization, (ii) model the time-series using cubic spline interpolation, (iii) and resample at every 15 min. Full size image
Figure 2 Architecture of the LSTM-based deep neural network.
The SEQ vital sign network processes the SEQ data through an LSTM-based network, whereas the non-SEQ module encompasses the non-SEQ data.
Full size image
Figure 3 Architecture of the TCN-based deep neural network.
The SEQ vital sign network processes the SEQ data through a series of residual TCN blocks followed by a FC layer, while the non-SEQ module processes the non-SEQ data.
Full size image
DL-based deterioration prediction model
We choose to develop and compare the performances of a LSTM-based model and a TCN-based model, because these two model architectures are commonly used for modeling time series data.
Our proposed LSTM-based deep neural network architecture consists of TD-LSTM layers and fully-connected (FC) layers.
The overall architecture of this network is shown in Fig. 2, and we refer to it as the Recurrent Sequential Vital Sign Network (RSVS-Net), consisting of two modules.
The SEQ data is processed by a module comprised of an LSTM network and a single FC layer, while the non-SEQ data is processed by a second module consisting of an independent FC layer.
The final prediction is based on both modalities.
The TCN-based network proposed in this study includes residual TCN blocks, and FC layers.
We refer to this model as Convolutional Sequential Vital Sign Network (CSVS-Net).
The module that is processing the SEQ data in this network consists of a series of five residual TCN blocks with exponentially enlarging kernel dilations, and a single FC layer.
The non-SEQ data processing module of the CSVS-Net is the same as the one in RSVS-Net.
The architecture of CSVS-Net is shown in Fig.
3.
For brevity, we refer to the residual TCN blocks as R-blocks throughout the rest of this paper.
RSVS-Net architecture details
LSTM networks are well-known for their ability to learn from SEQ data and have been widely used in studies where the time-series data is integral to the learning of the system and predicting future events55,56.
The temporal module consists of a temporally-dilated LSTM, which takes three vital signs as input at each time step, and has three layers, each containing 32 hidden units.
The final hidden state of the LSTM network, consisting of a dimensionality of 32, is processed by an FC layer with an output dimensionality of 16.
The non-SEQ data, with a dimensionality of 9, is processed by a single FC layer, which computes an output of dimensionality of 16.
Finally, the latent representations of the two modalities are concatenated as a vector of dimensionality of 32 and then processed by an FC fusion layer with an output dimensionality of 8.
This is then followed by a single FC layer with sigmoid activation and an output dimensionality of one, which represents the prediction that a sample precedes deterioration or is not within the specified time horizon.
All of the FC layers use hyperbolic tangent activation except for the last layer, which uses sigmoid activation.
The RSVS-Net model has 22,209 trainable parameters.
CSVS-Net architecture details
TCN models have gained increasing attention recently for time-series data analysis49,50,57,58,59.
In TCNs, convolution is causal, meaning that the convolution output at time t will only rely on the signal at time t or earlier49.
In the CSVS-Net, the SEQ data module comprises five serialized R-blocks.
Each block has two dilated causal 1D convolutional (DC-Conv) layers.
In addition, each R-block has a residual connection, so the network would become more effective in learning the extracted features and the modifications applied to the input signal by the DC-Conv layers.
At the end of each R-block structure, the output of the last DC-Conv layer and the R-block’s input will be summed.
Therefore, these signals should have matching dimensions.
To ensure this criteria is satisfied throughout the model, in the first residual R-block, a \(1 \times 1\) convolutional layer with linear activation function is implemented in the residual connection to match the input data dimension to the output of the DC-Conv layers.
In CSVS-Net, all of the DC-Conv layers in the R-blocks have 28 filters, and use hyperbolic tangent activation function.
Hence, the output dimension of every R-block is (\(N \times 28\)), with N being the number of samples for each feature in the vital sign time-series signals.
For 24-h observation period for each feature, since we have 4 samples in each hour, the length of the signal will be \(N = 1 + (4 \times 24) = 97\).
For analyzing the full length of this signal, the architecture of the CSVS-Net should be able to have a receptive field (\(R_{field}\)) big enough to analyze the entire signal length.
The \(R_{field}\) parameter can be computed using Eq.
(1).
$$\begin{aligned} R_{field} = 1 + 2\times (K - 1)\times \sum _{i=1}^B d_i. \end{aligned}$$
(1)
In Eq.
(1), K represents the filter size, B is the number of R-blocks in the architecture, and \(d_i\)
is the kernel dilation used at each R-block.
By choosing \(K=3\), \(B=5\), and \(d_i = 2^{(i-1)}\), we will have enabled the model to gain receptive field of 125.
It should be noted that any other chosen number of R-blocks will either result in an insufficient or unnecessarily large receptive fields for the model.
Finally, a “slicer” layer is implemented at the end of the R-block chain, which only passes through the last array of the final R-block’s output.
Hence, the dimension of the slicer layer output is (\(1 \times 28\)).
Thereafter, this \(1 \times 28\) vector is processed by an FC layer with dimensionality of 16.
The rest of the layers in the CSVS-Net are the same as the ones in RSVS-Net.
The CSVS-Net model has 22,709 trainable parameters.
Three-phase training strategy
In order to optimize the performance of the proposed network, the training strategy consists of three phases, as described below.
Phase 1: Training of SEQ module In the first phase, we train the SEQ module only and freeze all other layers.
The output of the FC layer in the SEQ module is connected to another FC layer that computes the prediction.
After this training phase, the weights are used to pre-initialize the SEQ module in the next phase, and we remove the second FC layer used to compute predictions during pre-training in the first phase.
Phase 2: Training of fusion layer In the second phase, we compute the representations of the SEQ data after initializing the associated module with the weights obtained in the first phase, and then freeze the SEQ module.
We then train the FC layer, FC fusion layer, and the FC output prediction layer using the non-SEQ data.
Phase 3: End-to-end fine-tuning of RSVS-Net and CSVS-NetIn the last phase, we initialize the parameters of the entire network using the weights obtained in the first two phases.
The network is trained end-to-end, to improve the overall network performance.
Model training and evaluation
To train and evaluate the models, we divide the entire dataset into training, validation, and testing sets, with percentages of \(66.6\%\), \(16.6\%\), and \(16.6\%\), respectively.
Each dataset has the same distribution of positive and negative samples.
The final performance results are obtained by evaluating the trained models on the test dataset.
We train the models using the training set for 200 epochs using the three-phase training strategy.
For the first and second phases, we choose a learning rate of 0.0001 based on initial experimentation and a learning rate of 0.00001 for the final fine-tuning stage.
For all phases, we use the ADAM optimizer60 with \(\beta _1 = 0.9\), \(\beta _2 = 0.999\), \(\epsilon = 10^{-8}\).
After training for 200 epochs, the best model is selected based on the epoch with the least validation loss across all epochs.
We evaluate the models on the test set.
We use the binary focal cross-entropy loss51 in order to manage class imbalance in the dataset.
We evaluate the models’ performance using three widely used metrics for binary classification: accuracy (with a 0.5 threshold to convert the predicted probability into binary), AUROC, and Area Under the Precision-Recall Curve (AUPRC).
A small percentage of Americans got the most recent covid-19 booster shot, and even fewer probably realize the federal government is preparing to recommend yet another shot as early as Tuesday.
Until a week or two ago, William Schaffner read that indifference as a sign the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention should advocate vaccinating only those most at risk from the virus.
But then Schaffner, an infectious disease specialist at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, changed his mind.
Members of the CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices won him over to the argument that the vaccine be recommended for all Americans above 6 months of age, he said in an interview.
The committee, which sets U.S. vaccination policy and helps determine insurance coverage for vaccines, will vote on the question Tuesday as it weighs the benefits of updated vaccines from Pfizer and Moderna.
The FDA, the CDC’s sister agency, approved the two booster shots for use on Monday.
Not all vaccine experts see it quite as Schaffner, a nonvoting liaison representative to the ACIP, does.
“I don’t plan to get it myself,” said Paul Offit, 72, the director of the Vaccine Education Center at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.
He’s had two boosters and got covid last year.
Another vaccine might increase his protection against mild infection for a few months, but like most Americans’ immune systems, his is already familiar enough with the virus to protect him from serious disease, Offit believes.
Some of Schaffner’s scientific colleagues argue the government should be recommending the shot only for frail, older, sick, and immunocompromised people.
Over 95% of the U.S. population are already covid-immunized through vaccination, infection, or both, and the risks of serious illness for healthy younger people are not great.
Schaffner doesn’t disagree.
But lots of not-necessarily-vulnerable Americans do want the shot for themselves and their children, and, without a CDC recommendation, insurance companies wouldn’t have to pay for the vaccine.
Email Sign-Up Subscribe to KFF Health News' free Morning Briefing.
Your Email Address Sign Up
It’s “pretty awful” that Pfizer and Moderna, the two main covid vaccine producers, have decided to charge up to $130 a shot, compared with $30 last year for the booster, which was produced under government contract, said Kathryn Edwards, a professor of pediatrics at Vanderbilt and a member of an ACIP working group on covid.
(Pfizer spokesperson Amy Rose said the price was “consistent with the value delivered” and reflected higher expenses to provide the shots commercially.)
But a partial recommendation could leave the very groups who suffered most during the pandemic — minorities and other disadvantaged groups — unable to get vaccinated if they want but can’t afford to.
“The last thing we need are financial barriers that would enhance disparities,” Schaffner said.
A 1993 law requires the federal government to pay for childhood vaccines recommended by the ACIP, and more recent legislation requires coverage of adult vaccines within 15 days of an ACIP recommendation.
Pfizer and Moderna continue to make billions of dollars in sales of covid vaccines, although they are producing fewer doses.
Moderna CEO Stéphane Bancel told investors in August that the company expected its global covid vaccine sales to be $6 billion to $8 billion this year, depending on uptake in the U.S. Pfizer expects about $14 billion this year.
Within a few years, both companies expect to be producing combination vaccines protecting against influenza, covid, and possibly respiratory syncytial virus.
About 170 million flu vaccines were distributed last flu season in the U.S., so a combination product could lock in a large market for covid vaccines as well.
Despite broad recommendations for the updated covid booster shot released last fall, only 17% of the U.S. population got it — and about 43% of those 65 and older.
How many will get the vaccine this season is uncertain, as is the benefit of the shot.
A study of the new Moderna vaccine showed that it increased antibodies to various covid strains, though it wasn’t clear how much protection against disease it would offer, nor for how long.
The new vaccine is unlikely to be a “game changer,” said John Moore, a professor of microbiology and immunology at Weill Cornell Medical College.
For healthier adults and children, “it’s a boost in protection for a few months,” Moore said.
Who exactly will benefit most is impossible to predict because the U.S. is “not a cookie-cutter population.”
Its people have by now been exposed to a bewildering combination of vaccines, boosters, and different strains of the virus.
Christopher Ridley, a Moderna spokesperson, said the updated vaccine was well matched to current viral strains, adding, “We encourage people to get vaccinated for covid when they get their annual flu shot.”
Fearmongering has distorted the threat of the virus, Moore said.
He is skeptical of the significance of the recent uptick in covid hospitalizations, and criticized social media posters who have raised fears about new viral strains that don’t seem to pose any fundamental challenge to the new vaccines.
“Editorial FOMO drove summer surge worries,” Moore said, using an acronym for “fear of missing out.”
Despite worrying comments and tweets by physicians such as Eric Topol, director of the Scripps Research Translational Institute, about a new covid variant called BA.2.86, “it turned out to be a real nothingburger,” Moore said.
Even Ashish Jha, who coordinated the Biden administration’s covid response until returning to his post as dean of the Brown University School of Public Health this year, agrees there is some ambiguity in the issue.
While he recommends that 20-year-olds get the booster, “a reasonable person” could disagree.
Unfortunately, such discussions in the current environment are clouded by “nonsense and bad information” that causes confusion and hurts people, he said in a recent podcast interview.
Whether truly needed or not, the vaccines, proponents say, are safe enough that even the small benefit of taking them will outweigh the risks.
The major, though rare, serious side effect of the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines — myocarditis, which particularly affected men in their teens and 20s — appears mainly to have occurred during the first two-shot series.
Paradoxically, those who most need protection from covid are often likely to have weakened immune systems that fail to generate the hoped-for response to vaccination.
So the vaccine is arguably most relevant for healthy people who come in frequent contact with vulnerable individuals.
With that in mind, England has announced the new booster would be offered only to people who are 65 or older, in nursing homes, or immunologically vulnerable — or who work or live with members of those groups.
“Any efforts to promote the new boosters should focus squarely on those at high risk,” said Norman Hearst, a family physician in San Francisco.
While recommending the vaccine for older patients, he said he wouldn’t advise a booster for young males because of the rare risk of myocarditis and the negligible benefit.
“The question is all the other people in between.”
In a commentary last November, infectious disease doctors Shira Doron and Monica Gandhi said vaccination campaigns should be radically honest about the limited value of vaccines for long-term protection against infection.
Such a campaign might advocate vaccinating children because even though it won’t protect durably, “it might prevent the rare case of severe disease.”
Meanwhile, the vaccine makers have their own plans for publicizing the vaccines.
In its call with investors last month, Moderna said it was focused on increasing sales and solidifying Moderna’s market share with branded promotion.
Its “awareness campaigns” will tout ACIP recommendations and “connect covid-19 with seasonal flu vaccines with the goal to drive consumers to get vaccinated this fall,” a company official said.
Moderna is co-sponsoring tennis’ U.S. Open this year and aired a video at the event Sept. 8 honoring Arthur Ashe, the only Black man to win Grand Slam titles, whom it credited with helping destigmatize HIV by revealing he had the virus.
The video presentation suggested that Moderna, like Ashe, has done well by being bold.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized the first-ever home test for people with symptoms of COVID-19, the flu, and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), giving users a one-stop approach to help diagnose their condition.
Consumers don't need a prescription to access the first-of-its-kind test, which is called the Labcorp Seasonal Respiratory Virus RT-PCR DTC Test.
"While the FDA has now authorized many COVID-19 tests without a prescription, this is the first test authorized for flu and RSV, along with COVID-19, where an individual can self-identify their need for a test, order it, collect their sample and send it to the lab for testing, without consulting a healthcare professional," Jeff Shuren, M.D., J.D., director of the FDA's Center for Devices and Radiological Health, said in a statement.
Here's a closer look at the new test, how it works, its cost, availability, and more.
How to Obtain and Administer the Test
The process of purchasing, administering, and obtaining results from the new Labcorp Seasonal Respiratory Virus RT-PCR DTC Test is relatively straightforward, though slightly more time-consuming than the at-home COVID-19 tests that were previously made available to the public.
The seasonal respiratory virus collection kits can be purchased online or in a store without a prescription.
The kits will be available starting in early June through Labcorp's OnDemand platform.
The kit will cost $169, but there would be no upfront cost for those who have insurance and are experiencing symptoms, Labcorp publicist Jacob Rund told Health.
Those who don't have insurance would be required to pay upfront when ordering the kit.
Once the kit is received, patients collect a sample using a nasal swab, much like the at-home COVID tests.
Samples can be self-collected by those who are 18 and older.
Individuals 14 years and older can self-collect samples with adult supervision, the FDA said.
Anyone younger than 14 must have adult assistance to collect the sample.
The test can identify and differentiate several respiratory viruses at the same time, the FDA said, including influenza A and B, RSV, and SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
Patients who test positive for any of these conditions are advised to have a follow-up with a healthcare provider.
Timeline for Test Results
Unlike the pre-existing at-home COVID tests, which provide results in about 15 minutes, the new seasonal respiratory virus swab must be sent to Labcorp for testing in order to get results.
Results are provided to patients through an online portal.
The FDA doesn't give a timeline for delivery of results, but Labcorp says on its website that the average time for results of the similar physician-administered version of the test is one to two days "from the date of the specimen pickup.
"
In other words, once your sample arrives at the lab, it's likely going to take another day or two to obtain your results—if the lab isn't backed up, William Schaffner, MD, an infectious disease specialist and professor at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, told Health.
The time delay in receiving results from the test is an issue that Dr. Schaffner and others say may ultimately impact the popularity of this new offering.
"You need that test result as quickly as possible," said Dr. Schaffner.
"I can't see that this will help you very much."
Patients, he said, will need to wait for the test to arrive at their home, then must obtain a sample, ship it to a lab, and wait for results.
"That will take days," said Dr. Schaffner.
Other medical experts expressed similar concerns about the timeline for results, pointing out that the idea of being able to test yourself for the flu at home is great, but the reality of the test falls short of being a true game-changer.
"It's a good step forward," Amesh Adalja, MD, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, told Health.
"However, this is a test that has to be sent to a laboratory for processing and results.
"
"What really will be game-changing and is needed are at-home tests that give results at home for influenza, RSV, sexually transmitted infections, and other common infectious disease," said Dr. Adalja.
"For high utilization or optimal utilization, a test that [provides] results in the home—like COVID and HIV tests do—is required.
"
Impact on Treatment and Easing Case Loads For Providers
Having access to at-home tests for the flu, COVID-19, and RSV has the potential to reduce the strain on health care providers and even reduce the risk of spreading infections.
Though here, as well, experts predict there may be some challenges.
"To a degree, it would decrease interactions and infected people coming into waiting rooms," Thomas Russo, MD, professor and chief of infectious disease at the University at Buffalo in New York, told Health.
"It could also lighten the queue," Dr. Russo added, noting that it would free up doctors to treat other people.
But the at-home test is not a perfect solution, Dr. Russo said.
Given the long lag time between developing symptoms, receiving and taking the at-home test, and getting the results, patients may not be able to get medication in time.
"The sooner you treat with Tamiflu for the flu or Paxlovid for COVID-19, the better your results," Dr. Russo said.
"The test is not going to be optimal in terms of timeliness and intervention.
"
Many doctors will write you a prescription for Tamiflu, for example, before your test result comes back positive, just in case, he pointed out.
That lag time could even raise the risk that patients become sicker with either illness before getting needed care, ultimately arriving at a doctor's office or hospital in worse shape—and using even more healthcare resources than if they had seen their doctor in the first place, Dr. Russo said.
The idea of an at-home test for COVID, the flu, and RSV is promising, Dr. Russo said.
But to be truly effective, the test would need to provide users with at-home test results.
And its price would need to be cheaper.
"This is just not optimal right now," Dr. Russo said.
This study provides complementary insights into the structural and microbiological characterization of ETT-deposited BF as a potential underestimated, singular and individualized compartment in critically ill patients during the third wave of the COVID-19 pandemic.
First, we identify the formation of two different BF aspects using confocal microscopy, and a tendency towards increased BF thickness with the total length of MV duration.
Then, despite a possible signature species of each BF profile, the description of the microbiological cartography associated with ETT-deposited BF enables the identification of supplemental species, as compared to the usual global patient colonization.
Finally, the comparison of antibiotic resistance phenotypes between ETT-deposited BF and other colonization/infection sites shows a higher resistance profile in BF for the predominant species usually associated with VAP.
Study and patient characteristics
Briefly, our patients’ characteristics illustrate a clinical profile that is similar to that described in the recent study by Blonz et al. regarding the epidemiology and microbiology of VAP in COVID-19 patients, notably the age, predominant chronic diseases, and median SAPS II and SOFA scores26.
In accordance with the recent identification of obesity as major risk factor for COVID-19 mortality, the median BMI of the population was found to be close to 30 kg/m2 27.
Despite the absence of a clear consensus, and multiple discussions questioning the routine clinical use of a Clinical Pulmonary Infection Score (CPIS) score > 6 for the diagnosis of VAP28,29, our data confirm a median CPIS score of 7 in patients with VAP.
The length of ICU stay as well as the occurrence of VAP also largely reflect the findings of the multicenter retrospective study by Blonz et al., with a long duration of MV and ICU stay, a significant reintubation rate due to the higher risk of developing VAP, and a mortality rate close to 30%26.
Mesostructural characterization
The morphological information provided by the analysis of ETT-deposited BF by confocal microscopy identified two mesoscopic BF profiles for the first time.
Contrary to CLSM, which allows ultra-high resolution imaging and the detection of complex microscopic structures within the biofilm (the microscopic scale being defined around 100 µm), the VivaScope®3000 system–similar to what optical coherence tomography (OCT) would permit–gives access to high resolution imaging of the biofilm structure at the mesoscopic scale, i.e. approximately within a 1 mm range (Table S1).
Indeed, Wagner et al.23, but also Morgenroth and Milferstedt30, demonstrated the critical importance of structural properties of the mesoscale to understand the ecological mechanisms associated with the development of biofilm structure30.
Previous results using optical coherence tomography14,31 and confocal microscopy32 from both human and animal in vivo clinical trials as well as in vitro studies seem to have already identified morphological aspects similar to the one described here as mushroom-shaped BF.
However, the ribbon-shaped BF displayed in Fig.
2B and D appears smooth and thinner, detaching from the inner surface of the ETT section.
Interestingly, these images resemble some of those obtained from scanning electron microscopy reported by Torres et al.32,33.
In line with the recent study by Thorarinsdottir et al., comparing BF formation on different ETT surfaces or materials22, we found no impact of the ICU on the preferential morphology of ETT-deposited BF.
Despite the absence of significant differences in the present study, there is an overall tendency towards the preeminence of ribbon-shaped BF for MV of shorter duration (Fig. 2G).
Despite the inability to visualize the aspect of ETT-deposited BF in real time throughout the MV of each patient, the results from the present study seem to corroborate the progressive formation of BF during MV, with a weak but significant correlation between BF thickness and the duration of MV.
These data were confirmed for ETT-deposited BF from either below- or above-the-cuff and may possibly reflect two successive stages in the formation of biofilm.
Still, their interpretation should be qualified due to the necessary fixation step of ETT sections following extubation, with a possible direct impact on, and modification of the BF structure during such chemical fixation.
Consequently, these two biofilm aspects warrant confirmation in a larger cohort before envisioning any generalization to critically ill patients requiring mechanical ventilation for more than 48 h.
Besides, additional clinical studies reporting both microscopic (with CLSM) and mesoscopic (with the VivaScope®3000 or an OCT system) information would be essential and complementary to better understand the impact of ETT-biofilm development on the occurrence of VAP.
Microbiological characterization
Regarding the method employed for the dislodgement of bacterial biofilms, the use of cultures after sonication was demonstrated to be superior for orthopedic devices34.
However, the ESCMID Biofilm guidelines published in 2015 clearly stated that regarding patients with ETT biofilm, “mucus from within the ETT can be aspirated and cultured to identify ETT pathogens in ETT biofilms that may have caused VAP35”.
Moreover, our group recently demonstrated a clear superiority of the chemical treatment dithiothreitol (Digest-EUR) over sonication for the dislodgement of Staphylococcus epidermidis biofilm on ETT24.
Based on both our recent experience and the ESCMID Biofilm guidelines, the present work used a mucus reagent (Digest-EUR) for the microbiological processing of biofilm.
Additional work and microbiological studies comparing multiple methods and pathogens to provide a complete view of the best protocol and the most efficient dislodgement of bacterial biofilms on endotracheal tube would be required in the future.
Compared to previous important studies reporting the microbiological characterization of ETT-deposited BF16,36,37, the present BIOPAVIR study provides additional data comparing the microbiological composition of biofilms from ETT sections from below- and above-the-cuff, with the global colonization retrieved in ICU patients via the usual respiratory samples33,38.
Despite a lower proportion of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and a significant proportion of negative cultures, the distribution of bacterial and microbiological species illustrated in Fig.
3C is largely comparable to that described by Danin et al.16 or Vandecandelaere et al.36, with a large predominance of Coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS), Enterococcus faecalis, Staphylococcus aureus, Enterobacter cloacae and Candida albicans.
Regarding the comparison of microbiological composition of ETT-deposited BF and respiratory samples (Fig. 4C), our results differ from those reported by de Ferreira et al.
on biofilms recovered from ETT in pediatric ICU patients showing a comparable distribution of microbiological species37.
Notably, in the present BIOPAVIR study, the identification of CoNS occurred more frequently in ETT-deposited BF than in respiratory samples, even more so in patients with COVID-19, while Haemophilus influenzae and COF are more likely retrieved in respiratory samples.
We believe this difference could result from the longer MV duration during the third wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, as compared to the MV duration reported in pediatric patients.
Interestingly, the small proportion of COF retrieved in BF compared to respiratory samples argues strongly for the quality of ETT section preparation and the reliable nature of the microbiological information extracted from BF.
Despite an overall tendency towards increased BF thickness with the occurrence of VAP, data from the present study should be analyzed with caution due to the small number of ETT per microbiological species, and this precludes confirmation of Wilsons’ hypothesis regarding the preferential occurrence of VAP with advanced biofilm stage15 or the discovery of a reliable association between microbiological species and any BF aspect.
Yet, these preliminary results open potential new perspectives towards an enhanced understanding of the development of ETT-deposited BF in the ICU.
To the best of our knowledge, our results (notably Fig. 5) displays one of the first attempts to compare the microbiological cartography of all species retrieved in BF to that gathered from global colonization of ICU patients during the third wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the usual respiratory samples as well as CVC and AC blood cultures, urinalysis, stool, drainage exudates and any other relevant colonization/infection site as decided by the attending physician.
The main information to be retained from these histograms is the identification of ETT-deposited BF as an underestimated microbiological compartment, independently of all other colonization/infection sites.
These results demonstrate the ability of BF analysis to retrieve additional species, which may sometimes go unnoticed from all other colonization sites.
Along with the data from Table 2 listing discordant antibiotic resistance phenotypes retrieved in BF, these results show the potential added value and importance of complete microbiological characterization of BF plus global colonization from ICU patients requiring MV.
Indeed, these analyses provided precious information with perspectives for future BF-based antimicrobial stewardship, especially considering that more than 80% of analyzed discordant bacterial phenotypes from BF acquired significant antibiotic resistance mechanisms, with the subsequent risk of developing VAP with multidrug-resistant pathogens.
Despite being a multicenter study with quite a large sample size and homogeneous groups when compared to similar previous works focusing on the development of BF on ETT, this study nevertheless has some limitations.
First, microbiological characterization would benefit from the addition of molecular-based techniques such as 16S/18S analyses of the BF microbiota to provide additional and complementary information regarding the composition of BF, when compared to the present culture-based only data.
Apart from prior antimicrobial treatment listed in the patient characteristics, data related to antimicrobial therapy during the ICU stay were not recovered in the present study.
Given the large panel of microbiological pathogens identified as potentially responsible for the development of VAP or other infectious complications, and also given the large number of clinical or microbiological variables already considered, any attempt to analyze the potential impact of antimicrobial therapy or interplay between these therapies and the biofilm structure would have resulted in a failure to highlight any relevant tendency.
A more detailed analysis of the impact of antimicrobial treatment would require specific focus on a single bacterial species, such as in the study by Fernández-Barat et al. describing the impact of both linezolid and vancomycin on the composition of endotracheal tube Staphylococcus aureus biofilms from ICU patients38.
Consequently, other clinical studies describing the impact of antimicrobial treatments would be essential to better understand the impact of such molecules on the development and composition of ETT biofilms.
In addition, further prospective studies in larger cohorts are warranted to confirm the results described in the present BIOPAVIR study, notably regarding the microbiological data and given the relatively small number of patients associated with each species.
Such restrictions hamper convenient translation of the present results into information regarding a possible association between the formation of BF and subsequent occurrence of VAP.
However, we believe that the routine clinical use of confocal microscopy with complete microbiological overview dedicated to BF characterization at the mesoscopic scale not only constitutes a major strength of the present work, but also reveals ETT-deposited BF to be an underestimated and specific microbiological compartment with possible future implications for antimicrobial stewardship in critically ill patients.
DETROIT — During the three months last year that the artist José Parlá was in a medically induced coma after contracting Covid-19, he had vivid dreams that he later found difficult to process: managing a Miami hotel circa 1980 and navigating a kidnapping plot involving his brother and the Hong Kong triads.
“I was perceiving these dreams not as dreams but as memories,” he said.
“Events that I believed had happened but weren’t real.”
The intensity of those visions, experienced unconscious and close to death, are metabolized in Parlá’s new body of work, completed since his recovery, titled “Polarities,” at Library Street Collective, an art gallery here.
Seven large-scale paintings on canvas and two on wood, at human scale, can be read as a body scan, and their dense networks of lines radiating outward from a central node can appear arterial, conjuring the intricate workings of the respiratory system, or the firing synapses in the brain.
But as personal as they are, they avoid much of the solipsism that characterized artists’ work during the pandemic.
Instead they take an expansive, world-historical view, reaching much further back, as Parlá’s work tends to do, to trace the psycho-geographic effect a place, and the memory of it, can have.
News Cycle Rising cases of COVID-19 variant, XBB.1.5
Deb Balzer
Share this:
Flu cases and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) rates are beginning to drop in the U.S.; however, reported cases of COVID-19 are increasing.
A new COVID-19 omicron variant, XBB.1.5, is spreading quickly and being closely monitored, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
"What we are learning about this new variant, XBB.1.5, is that it spreads much more easily compared to the previous variants, and almost twice more likely to spread compared to the previous variants," says Dr. Raj Palraj, an infectious diseases specialist with Mayo Clinic Health System.
"Most recent data from the CDC show that more than 40% of the COVID-19 infections in the U.S. are due to this new variant.
"
Watch: Dr. Raj Palraj talks about COVID-19 variant XBB.1.5
Journalists: Video is available in the downloads at the end of the post.
Please courtesy: Mayo Clinic News Network.
Name super/CG: Raj Palraj, M.B.B.S., M.D./Infectious Diseases/Mayo Clinic Health System.
Evolving COVID-19 variants
The virus that causes COVID-19 is constantly changing and has been mutating since it first appeared three years ago.
Mutations of viruses are a normal process and are expected to happen.
"This new variant makes the virus easily attached to our respiratory mucosa.
It is able to attach to the nose and throat cells much better compared to the previous variants," says Dr. Palraj.
"This means the virus is able to infect more people and transmit more easily.
"
How XBB.1.5 transmits more easily
Dr. Palraj explains how that happens.
"The COVID-19 virus attaches to our throat or the nose cells through a protein called a spike protein.
And as the virus mutates, there are certain changes in the spike protein that make it easy to attach to our cells.
That's why we think this is more likely to infect more people and transmit more easily.
But the good news is there is no indication so far that this new variant causes more severe disease," he says.
Symptoms of infection remain similar to previous strains of COVID-19 infection: cough, runny nose, sore throat, fever and muscle ache.
The CDC continues to monitor the virus to see how it changes.
Preventing infection
Dr. Palraj says, while the variant in current circulation is very new, vaccination remains an important tool against severe illness.
"What we know from the previous variant cycles is that the COVID-19 booster shot helps reduce the risk of severe pneumonia, reduces the risk of getting hospitalized and reduces the risk of death," he says.
"We may not be able to prevent infection, but the odds of getting a severe disease is greatly reduced by the vaccination.
"
Along with vaccination, other tools to fight variants and infections include:
Masking.
Self-testing.
Staying home if you have suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
Avoid contact with people who have suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
Practice good hand hygiene.
Dr. Palraj recommends common sense precautions.
If you have symptoms or don't feel well, he says to stay home to help prevent the spread of the virus, and get tested.
Also, if you are ill and test positive, it is important to contact your health care team right away.
Medications, like Paxlovid, are available for people with certain risk factors; however, they need to be taken at the beginning of infection in order to be effective.
Related posts:
For the safety of its patients, staff and visitors, Mayo Clinic has strict masking policies in place.
Anyone shown without a mask was recorded prior to COVID-19 or recorded in an area not designated for patient care, where social distancing and other safety protocols were followed.
Related Articles
A new USC study finds that 23% of people infected with COVID will become long haulers, and identifies predictors of who is likely to develop the sometimes-debilitating symptoms that can last for months.
The research, which appears in Scientific Reports, is unique because it accounts for preexisting symptoms such as fatigue and sneezing that are common to other conditions and may be mistaken for COVID symptoms.
Long COVID is a major public health concern.
Twenty-three percent is a very high prevalence, and it may translate to millions of people, said first author Qiao Wu, a doctoral candidate at the USC Leonard Davis School of Gerontology.
More knowledge on its prevalence, persistent symptoms and risk factors may help health care professionals allocate resources and services to help long haulers get back to normal lives.
The work finds that obesity and hair loss at the time of infection are predictors of long COVID, but that other underlying conditions  such as diabetes or smoking status  have no discernable link to long-lasting symptoms.
Long COVID:
Symptoms last 12 weeks or longer
While SARS-CoV-2 is typically an acute illness lasting about three weeks, some people with COVID have symptoms that last months or longer.
The World Health Organization defines long COVID as symptoms that last 12 weeks or longer, a definition that the studys authors also used.
Estimates of the prevalence of long COVID range from 10% to 90% due to evolving diagnostic criteria and differences in study design.
For example, some studies have focused on hospitalized patients, which provided a limited perspective on long COVID in the broader population.
USC researchers used an internet-based national survey  the Understanding Coronavirus in America tracking survey, conducted by the Center for Economic and Social Research (CESR) at the USC Dornsife College of Letters, Arts and Sciences  with an estimated 8,000 respondents from across the country.
From March 2020 to March 2021, researchers invited participants to answer biweekly questions about COVID.
Their final sample included 308 infected, non-hospitalized individuals who were interviewed one month before, around the time of infection and 12 weeks later.
Who will get long covid?
Long-haulers describe symptoms
After accounting for preexisting symptoms, about 23% of the participants reported that they had experienced new-onset symptoms during infection which lasted for more than 12 weeks, meeting the studys definition of long COVID.
The new-onset, persistent symptoms most commonly experienced by long COVID patients were:
Headache (22%).
Runny or stuffy nose (19%).
Abdominal discomfort (18%).
Fatigue (17%).
Diarrhea (13%).
In addition, the researchers found that people had significantly higher odds of experiencing long COVID if, at the time of infection, they:
Were obese.
Experienced hair loss.
Experienced headache.
Experienced a sore throat.
Unexpectedly, the odds of long COVID among people who experienced chest congestion were lower.
There was a lack of evidence relating the risk of long COVID to preexisting health conditions such as diabetes or asthma, or age, gender, race/ethnicity, education or current smoking status.
The significant association between long COVID and obesity is consistent with previous studies, said University Professor Eileen Crimmins, a demographer at the USC Leonard Davis School.
We differ from some existing studies in that we didnt find a link between long COVID and any sociodemographic factors.
In addition to Wu and Crimmins, Jennifer Ailshire of the USC Leonard Davis School co-authored the study.
The research was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Aging (P30 AG017265).
CLAIM: COVID-19 only spikes during election seasons.
AP’S ASSESSMENT: False.
There is no connection between rising COVID-19 cases and the electoral process, epidemiology experts confirm.
Since the first U.S. case was confirmed in January 2020, the virus has spiked near the end of the year, but also during summer, nowhere near major elections.
THE FACTS:
As the 2024 presidential race enters the fall primary season, some on social media are trying to tie elections to COVID-19 waves, falsely claiming that the virus is a tool to control the outcome.
“Some won’t figure out the Mysterious Connection between The Coronavirus & The Election!!!”
reads a caption on one Instagram post.
“It’s Called Election Interference by Mail In Ballots & the Machines.
Wake-Up America.”
A second caption on the post states: “Imagine a virus so smart it only attacks during election season.”
But elections do not dictate when COVID-19 spikes, which experts say have occurred far from major elections multiple times.
“There’s no biologically plausible or credible reason why spikes would be linked with election seasons,” Dr. Emily Smith, an epidemiologist and assistant professor of emergency medicine and surgery at Duke University, wrote in an email to the AP.
“Surges are due to increases in cases, which are related to human behavior.
So reduced masking and vaccination rates are associated with case increases.
Not election seasons.”
Although there is no formal definition of a spike, it can be characterized as the peak of a consistent increase in cases, said Dr. Janak Patel, director of the department of infection control and healthcare epidemiology at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston.
The U.S. has seen rises in COVID-19 cases that coincide with election seasons in November — but they have also occurred during the summer, according to Patel.
Data from the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention shows that the largest spike occurred the week ending Jan. 8, 2022, when 30.5% of reported COVID-19 tests came back positive.
By contrast, cases had been decreasing in the lead-up to the off-year election on Nov. 2, 2021, a few months prior.
Cases did spike close to the 2020 presidential election after they began rising in September of that year, but the 2022 midterms were a different story.
After a peak with a 14.2% positivity rate the week ending July 23, cases went down leading up to the election on Nov. 8.
“I haven’t seen any particular timing with elections,” Patel said.
“And people campaign for elections throughout the year.”
It is unclear whether the current pattern of COVID-19 waves will continue, or why it has occurred thus far, since the virus hasn’t been around long enough for scientists to know for sure, according to Patel.
Reports of positive tests have become less consistent with the advent of at-home testing, so scientists are now also looking at death and hospitalization rates to track waves of the virus.
While COVID-19 hospital admissions are currently rising — there were 18,871 for the week ending Sept. 2 — they’re a far cry from past peaks, like the 44,000 weekly hospital admissions in early January, the nearly 45,000 in late July 2022, or the 150,000 admissions during the omicron surge of January 2022.
___
This is part of AP’s effort to address widely shared misinformation, including work with outside companies and organizations to add factual context to misleading content that is circulating online.
Learn more about fact-checking at AP.
Northwestern will incorporate its remaining COVID-19 protocols into broader health operations beginning June 13, according to a University news release.
Starting this summer, the University will discontinue isolation housing in 1835 Hinman, on-campus testing in the Jacobs Center and the current COVID-19 vaccine requirement for most students.
The changes follow the Biden administration’s decision to end the COVID-19 national emergency this month, with plans to end the national public health emergency in May.
Other universities nationwide are adopting similar changes, the release said.
“We deeply appreciate the Northwestern community’s commitment to the mission of the University while adapting to abrupt shifts and changes in the trajectory of COVID-19 that presented significant challenges at work and at home,” Vice President for Operations Luke Figora said in the release.
While the “overwhelming majority” of the campus community is vaccinated, according to the release, the University will cease to require all students to get the COVID-19 vaccination and booster shots.
This excludes students in clinical programs who need to comply with site requirements.
Students who want to be tested can contact the Northwestern Medicine Student Health Service, but NU encourages faculty to make their own testing arrangements.
When students do test positive, they will not be required to report it to the University, a requirement that NU lifted for faculty in January.
The University recommends students defer to guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention regarding booster vaccines and isolation protocols.
With the discontinuation of isolation housing except for a few emergency spaces, the University will ask students who test positive to isolate in their own dorms going forward.
“We thank our students, faculty and staff for their sacrifices and understanding throughout our response to COVID-19,” Figora said in the release.
“We will remain vigilant in monitoring COVID-19 and other threats to public health as we continue to safeguard our community in the years to come.”
Email: [email protected]
Twitter: @SQPowers04
Related Stories:
— Northwestern to discontinue COVID-19 asymptomatic testing
— NU COVID-19 isolation housing evolves, NU provides no booster shot update
— Northwestern provides limited COVID-19 resources for fall
*This call was funded by a cooperative agreement with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (grant number NU50CK000574).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is an agency within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
The contents of this call does not necessarily represent the policy of CDC or HHS, and should not be considered an endorsement by the Federal Government.
To Download a copy of the Q&A Responses here .
To Download a copy of the presentation click here .
Topic: Antibody Therapy & Second Boosters: Updates and Perspectives on Protecting Our Most Vulnerable
Moderator:
Dana S. Wollins, DrPH, MGC
Vice President, Clinical Affairs & Practice Guidelines, IDSA
Update: New Resources to Manage Paxlovid Drug Interactions
Carlos del Rio, MD, FIDSA
President-Elect, IDSA
Distinguished Professor of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases
Emory University School of Medicine
Professor of Epidemiology & Global Health
Rollins School of Public Health of Emory University
Topics and Featured Experts:
Prevention of COVID-19 in Immunocompromised Individuals: Focus on Evusheld
Clinical Considerations & Patient Scenarios
Camille Kotton, MD, FIDSA, FAST
Clinical Director
Transplant & Immunocompromised Host Infectious Diseases
Massachusetts General Hospital
Utilization Update & Strategies to Improve Access
Derek Eisnor, MD
Medical Officer, Division of Clinical Development
Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority
COVID-19 Allocation and Distribution Lead
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
Lessons Learned and Success Stories
Swana K. Thomas, PharmD, MPH
Clinical Pharmacist, Ambulatory Care
Geisinger Health System
Monoclonal Antibody Therapy for Treatment: What are the Options?
Raymund R. Razonable, MD
Professor of Medicine
Vice Chair, Infectious Diseases
Mayo Clinic
Second Boosters: Who Will Benefit?
Updates & Clinical Considerations from the April 20 ACIP Meeting
Elisha Hall, PhD, RD
Lead, Clinical Guidelines
Vaccine Task Force
COVID-19 Response
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Perspectives on the Immunocompromised & People Over 50
William Schaffner, MD
Professor of Preventative Medicine, Department of Health Policy
Professor of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
IMAGE CAPTION:
Corrie Detweiler, a professor of molecular, cellular and development biology at CU Boulder, is working to discover new compounds to address the growing threat of superbugs.
After years of progress in the battle against antimicrobial-resistance, so-called “superbugs” have made a concerning comeback in the age of COVID, with resistant hospital-onset infections and deaths soaring at least 15% in the first year of the pandemic alone, according to a new Centers for Disease Control report.
Each year, about 3 million people in the U.S. are infected with germs, like bacteria and fungi, that have developed resistance to the drugs designed to kill them.
About 50,000 people die from these threats, often acquired in the very healthcare facilities designed to treat them.
By 2050, some scientists predict, there could be more deaths from antibiotic resistance than from cancer.
Corrie Detweiler, a professor of molecular, cellular, and developmental biology at CU Boulder, has spent her career trying to develop solutions to what some call “the shadow pandemic” of antimicrobial-resistance.
CU Boulder Today spoke with her about why so many antimicrobial drugs won’t work anymore, how COVID made things worse and what can be done to make things better.
How long have antibiotics been around, and how big of an impact did they have?
Modern antibiotics were discovered in 1928, with penicillin, but it wasn’t until World War II that they started to be made in large amounts in the U.S. to treat soldiers.
That demonstrated their true potential—many people who would have died from infections from battle wounds survived.
Since then, they have had a massive impact.
They have helped people to survive basic things like childbirth or falling on the playground or having minor surgery.
Prior to antibiotics, people used to routinely die from those things, and as they stop working, such activities are going to become much more risky.
You might think harder before you get your hip replaced.
When your friend goes into childbirth, you might be concerned you won’t see her alive again.
We risk going back to a period 100 years ago when even a minor infection could mean death.
It would radically change our lives.
What is a superbug, and how common are they?
A superbug is a bacterium or fungi that is resistant to clinical antimicrobials.
They are increasingly common.
Right now, for instance, the percentage of clinical isolates of Enterobacteriales (which includes things like Salmonella and E. coli) that are known to be resistant is around 35%.
So, if you go into a hospital and get an infection like this, you have about a one in three chance of being either untreatable or not very treatable.
Prior to the pandemic, how were we doing in addressing this issue?
A lot of progress had been made, particularly in hospital-acquired infections, based on a better understanding of the problem and better guidelines about when to use antibiotics.
Between 2012 and 2017, for instance, deaths from antimicrobial resistance fell by 18% overall and nearly 30% in hospitals.
That all fell apart during COVID.
Why?
How did COVID spawn an uptick?
We didn't know how to treat COVID, and, understandably, there was a fair amount of chaos in the medical system.
People were using antibiotics more, often inappropriately.
About 80% of COVID patients received antibiotics.
People were given them prophylactically, prior to knowing they had a lung bacterial infection.
That's not to say that none of (the patients) needed them.
Some did.
But the more you use antibiotics, the more you select for resistance.
And that’s how you eventually get a superbug.
What harm is it for me to take an antibiotic that I may not need, "just in case"?
When you take an antibiotic that you don't need, you are essentially putting pressure on other microbes in your body to grow stronger.
That could make you sick later or make someone in your household sick.
You’re also selecting for resistant bacteria that you evacuate out into the water system and can potentially spread antibiotic resistance.
And then there is also a more selfish component, which is that antibiotics kill off your microbiota – the beneficial bacteria we all have within our nasal passages and our GI tract to keep us healthy.
That makes you more vulnerable to illness.
What can society do to address this?
First, we need to go back to this idea of stewardship in hospitals — to only give out antibiotics when there is a clear need.
We were doing the right thing.
And then something terrible came along and messed it up, and it demonstrated that what we were doing was working well.
That’s a good thing.
Second, we need to discover and develop novel classes of antibiotics.
The last time a new class of antibiotics hit the market was in 1984.
The fundamental problem is that they’re not profitable to develop, compared to say a cancer drug.
You can go to the drugstore and get a course of amoxicillin for $8.
We need programs that reward industry and academic labs like ours for doing the early research.
What does your lab do?
We're using basic biology to try to figure out new ways to kill bacteria during an infection and identify compounds that work differently than existing drugs.
What can individuals do?
Don’t pressure your doctor for an antibiotic unless there's evidence that you need one, and if your doctor does want to prescribe them ask why you need them.
They should be able to explain why.
If you do need one, take the whole course.
This interview has been edited for brevity and clarity.
The Food and Drug Administration earlier this month greenlighted updated Covid boosters from Pfizer and Moderna.
The shots, which are formulated to target the XBB.1.5 subvariant, are now available.
Anyone age 5 and older can get an updated booster shot from either Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna, regardless of whether they were previously vaccinated, the FDA said in a statement on Sept. 11.
People who have been vaccinated should wait at least two months after their last Covid shot before getting the new booster.
Novavax, which also makes a Covid vaccine, said on Sept. 11 that its updated booster was still being reviewed by the FDA.
Unlike Pfizer and Moderna, Novavax’s shot doesn’t use mRNA technology.
The boosters come as Covid cases are rising in the U.S., driven by a slew of subvariants.
Officials hope that the boosters can blunt a possible spike in winter illness.
Here’s what to know about the new shots.
How well do these boosters work?
In June, the FDA asked drugmakers to formulate the fall boosters to target the then-dominant XBB.1.5 subvariant.
While that particular strain is no longer as prevalent, other strains in circulation are still closely related to XBB.1.5.
Two of the predominant strains, EG.5 and FL.1.5.1, are members of the XBB subvariant family.
Pfizer, Moderna and Novavax have said that their boosters work against EG.5, and Moderna said its booster also works against FL.1.5.1.
Dr. Eric Topol, executive vice president of Scripps Research in La Jolla, California, said he is “not concerned” about vaccine effectiveness, saying that the vaccines developed so far have consistently shown to provide protection against severe disease, hospitalization and death.
“The new booster will certainly ameliorate protection,” Topol said.
Experts are also keeping a close eye on BA.2.86 — dubbed “Pirola” by some on social media — an omicron subvariant that initially caused alarm because of its high number of mutations.
Emerging lab data, however, suggests it may not be immune-evasive or transmissible as initially feared.
Moderna and Pfizer have both stated that their boosters appeared to work against BA.2.86, saying that the shots triggered a strong antibody response against the variant.
Dr. Dan Barouch, director of the Center for Virology and Vaccine Research at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, said recent lab studies have shown people who had been infected by an XBB omicron subvariant within the last six months generated antibodies against EG.5, BA.2.86 and other omicron subvariants, suggesting the updated booster will also provide protection against these strains.
“It is likely that the XBB.1.5 monovalent vaccines will raise antibodies against all the circulating variants,” Barouch said.
When should I get the new booster?
For people who haven’t gotten a booster since last fall and haven’t had a recent Covid infection, experts say they should get their booster as soon as possible.
But with rising cases, many people are sick now with Covid or have recently recovered from an infection.
According to a CDC official, people with recent infections may wait about 90 days from their illness before getting the booster.
People who are unvaccinated can also get the booster, and do not have to complete a multidose primary series beforehand.
How much will it cost?
For the first time since the vaccines became available, the federal government will not cover the cost of the shots.
Pfizer and Moderna have said they are pricing each vaccine dose at over $100.
Jennifer Kates, director of the Global Health & HIV Policy Program at the nonprofit KFF, said most people with private and public health insurance should continue to pay nothing out of pocket for the boosters — as long as they stick with an in-network provider.
“If you go out of network, you might have some cost, just like with any other service,” she said.
People who don’t have insurance — an estimated 30 million in the U.S. — should be able to get a booster for free at community health centers.
Additionally, the Biden administration is also rolling out a “bridge” program that will offer uninsured people access to free boosters at least through the end of 2024.
Those who don’t know or don’t have access to these resources may have to pay out of pocket, she said.
How many boosters will we need?
Most healthy people will likely only need one booster until fall 2024, said Dr. Ofer Levy, the director of the Precision Vaccines Program at Boston Children’s Hospital and a member of the FDA’s advisory committee.
Dr. Paul Offit, a vaccine expert at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and another member of the FDA’s advisory committee, said it’s possible people at high risk for severe disease such as older adults or who are immunocompromised may be advised to get an additional dose in a few months.
“All of those people share one thing in common: They don’t make very good immune responses,” he said.
What are the side effects?
Levy said the side effects of updated boosters should be the same as the previous iterations of the shots.
Common side effects include headache, chills, fever, nausea and pain or swelling at the injection site, according to the CDC.
Pfizer and Moderna’s vaccines have been associated with a small but increased risk of myocarditis, the inflammation of the heart muscle, mostly in young men.
Most people make a full recovery, and early studies suggest incidences of myocarditis are highest following the second dose of a primary series.
Still, Pfizer and Moderna are currently running trials to track health issues — if any — in the years following a diagnosis of vaccine-associated heart problems.
Follow NBC HEALTH on Twitter & Facebook.
We think of COVID-19 as a human pandemic, but it’s much more than that.
The virus that causes the disease, SARS-CoV-2, can infect a wide and growing range of animals, both captive and wild.
So far, the virus has been detected in more than a hundred domestic cats and dogs, as well as captive tigers, lions, gorillas, snow leopards, otters, and spotted hyenas, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Zoo staff in the U.S. have recorded a single positive case in a binturong, coati, cougar, domestic ferret, fishing cat, lynx, mandrill, and squirrel monkey.
In the United States, only three wild species—mink, mule deer, and white-tailed deer—have tested positive, according to the USDA.
Cases have been detected elsewhere in the world in wild black-tailed marmosets, big hairy armadillos, and a leopard.
Surprise summer guest
France has seen a slight rebound in the number of Covid-19 cases since August 1.
The numbers of medical procedures and emergency room visits have risen amid the appearance of a new variant nicknamed "Eris".
Although there is no cause for panic, experts say it is worth keeping an eye on the situation as many superspreader events like festivals take place during the summer months.
A health worker takes a swab from a passenger who has just arrived from China at the Covid-19 testing booths in Charles de Gaulle airport in Roissy, outside Paris, on January 1, 2023.
Advertising Read more
Covid-19 is once again making headlines at the height of summer in France, as well as several other countries, due to an upsurge in cases.
The number of visits to emergency rooms for suspected Covid-19 cases rose by an average of 31 percent in the week following the Bayonne Festival – one of Europe’s largest festive gatherings, which attracted 1.3 million people from July 26 to July 30 – compared to the previous week.
Nine hundred and twenty patients across all age groups were seen, according to Santé publique France, a government body under the authority of the health ministry, which stated that such numbers remain "moderate".
These are the only figures available for now, as daily monitoring of the pandemic ended on June 30 due to the "favourable epidemiological context".
French medical emergency service SOS Medécins reported an 84 percent increase in medical consultations for suspected Covid-19 cases last week compared to the previous one.
While this increase concerned "all age groups", it particularly affected children under the age of two.
The rise in incidence in mainland France is "localised, particularly in the southwest and essentially driven by the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region", said the health ministry, noting that "most cases are in very popular holiday regions".
A variant more resistant to antibodies
This upsurge could be explained by the appearance of a new EG.5.1 variant, nicknamed "Eris" – the goddess of discord in Greek mythology – by some scientists.
The World Health Organization (WHO) added this newcomer to the list of "variants of interest" on Wednesday.
New #COVID19 variant of interest: EG.5.
Formerly a variant under monitoring, WHO has now designated this a variant of interest.
There has been a steady increase in this variant’s prevalence.
As of 7 August 2023, over 7000 sequences have been shared from 51 countries.
More… pic.twitter.com/DlDdAPYMos — World Health Organization (WHO) (@WHO) August 9, 2023
"A new Covid-19 wave is appearing with the emergence of a new variant, which is more transmissible than its predecessors and establishing itself as the dominant variant," says Antoine Flahault, epidemiologist and director of the Institute of Global Health at the University of Geneva’s Faculty of Medicine.
"This is what seems to have been happening in recent weeks with the Omicron EG.5.1 sub-variant.
"
The EG.5.1 strain is currently present in nearly 35 percent of viruses sequenced in France, according to Gisaid, an international database that shares official data on Covid-19.
This figure "should not be taken literally", says Mircea Sofonea, senior lecturer in epidemiology at the University of Montpellier in southern France, because "it only takes positive tests into account and we have certainly not tested all infected people".
Here's the latest variant picture for France.
The new EG.5.*
"Eris" variant (34%) has been rising quite rapidly during July, and is now dominant over XBB.1.9.*
"Hyperion" (22%), XBB.1.16.*
"Arcturus" (14%) and XBB.1.5.*
"Kraken" (14%).
More details:https://t.co/9wVn5KDCmN pic.twitter.com/u0AOISy8Ck — Mike Honey (@Mike_Honey_)
August 6, 2023
Since the beginning of the Omicron era, new variants – such as Eris – have been regularly identified in France as being more resistant to antibodies.
These have "immune escape properties", says Sofonea.
"This is nothing new.
But the current upsurge in the epidemic shows that the virus is continuing to mutate.
"
'No more serious forms'
The situation remains under control so far, with no strain on hospitals, particularly intensive care units.
"In the countries where this variant has been detected, there are no more serious forms of the disease than with previous Omicron variants," says Flahault.
"In particular, healthcare systems are no more saturated than they were before."
Furthermore, the WHO has stated that "the public health risk posed by EG.5 is evaluated as low at the global level".
Nevertheless, researchers warn that governments must remain cautious and plan ahead to avoid finding themselves in an alarming situation in a few months' time.
"By the autumn, traffic may reach significant levels for healthcare systems," says Sofonea.
"Flu and bronchiolitis epidemics can occur during this period.
That's what is so worrying.
"
Read moreHoping for a breakthrough, the search for answers on long Covid continues
A number of measures have been proposed to curb the virus' transmission.
"We could aim to eliminate the risk of renewed Covid-19 waves, just like the seasonal flu, by improving indoor air quality," says Flahault, who first and foremost recommends "wearing FFP2 masks in enclosed, poorly ventilated areas open to the public".
Flahault belives that vaccination remains key.
While the effectiveness of Covid-19 vaccines does seem to diminish over time, a booster vaccine in the autumn "would reduce the risk of serious forms of the disease", he says.
A new vaccination campaign, targeting Covid-19 and the flu, is scheduled "from mid-October", according to the health ministry.
This article has been translated from the original in French.
Daily newsletterReceive essential international news every morning Subscribe
FDA issues rare comment on approval of Covid and flu home test from company that went bankrupt
Last week, the Food and Drug Administration issued an emergency authorization for the first at-home Covid-19 and flu combination test.
The news came just days after the test’s maker, Lucira, filed for bankruptcy, blaming the FDA’s “protracted” approval process for its financial problems.
Now the FDA has released a rare comment clarifying what happened during its authorization process.
The new details are raising hopes among other home-test manufacturers that the FDA is becoming more flexible about its requirements for approving at-home flu test kits.
advertisement
The FDA ultimately authorized Lucira’s test with fewer samples than the agency had previously said it would require for approval, the statement from Jeff Shuren, director of the FDA’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health, explained.
It accepted fewer samples partly because a National Institutes of Health program gave the FDA data showing that even without more test samples, Lucira’s test kits would be of appropriate quality.
Shuren introduced the comment as “part of the FDA’s commitment to address misinformation.”
The agency did not immediately respond to questions about what misinformation the statement was meant to address.
The statement also disclosed the FDA initially identified a “toxic substance” in one of Lucira’s test components, which the company rectified with a test redesign.
Lucira declined to comment on the FDA authorization process.
advertisement
Home-test company executives including Nelson Patterson, president and CEO of Anavasi Diagnostics, and Michael Mina, chief science officer of home testing company eMed, lauded the FDA’s decision to be more flexible in the data it requires for approval.
In a written comment, Mina said the NIH’s Independent Test Assessment Program (ITAP) “is innovative and focuses less on the types of evaluations that FDA usually asks for (clinical specimens from people who do not know if they are infected) and more on efficient formats of evaluating tests.”
But while the FDA’s clarification of what happened with Lucira suggests that it is willing to modernize its criteria for emergency use authorizations, the news may also add to the frustrations of many test manufacturers who complain the FDA is not transparent or consistent about what data are needed for an authorization.
“To me, that [decision] makes sense from an industry standpoint.
I applaud that,” said Patterson, whose company received an emergency use authorization for its molecular Covid test in February.
He thought that the precedent set by the FDA’s actions in the Lucira case could bode well for future authorizations from other companies.
But, he added of the FDA’s altered requirements for approval, “Do I feel cheated?
I wish I had known that that would be the standard, because I would have applied last summer.”
Lucira co-founder Debkishore Mitra, who left the company in late 2022, expressed his own frustrations with navigating FDA requirements in a “Lab to Startup” podcast interview released March 7.
“We were building the puzzle a little bit,” said Mitra of earlier FDA authorizations, “but this was not a puzzle where all the pieces are fixed graphics and you put them in.
The pieces are changing in shape, size, and color while you’re putting the puzzle together.
So it’s a very iterative process.”
Newsletters Sign up for Morning Rounds Your daily dose of news in health and medicine.
Please enter a valid email address.
Privacy Policy
In response to inquiries about how the bankruptcy affects its operations, Lucira said, “Our focus is making available those tests we have built up in preparation for an authorization prior to the respiratory season.”
A Feb. 27 press release says the company is “seeking a strategic or financial partner for the resumption of manufacturing and development of additional home diagnostic products.”
Currently, Lucira’s Covid and flu molecular tests — which perform similarly to a PCR test, but can be done at home — are available to over-the-counter customers at $34.99, nearly half of their $68 list price.
If you have been looking for a sense of pandemic closure, the World Health Organization’s declaration Friday that it was ending the Covid global health emergency was about as close to it as you are likely to get.
The reality is that although battlefield metaphors are often employed to describe humankind’s struggle with the SARS-CoV-2 virus, there will be no 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month-like moment signaling that an armistice has been achieved.
advertisement
There are no fixed borders between a pandemic, when a pathogen is new to humans and causing wide scale disease and often high levels of death, and the ensuing endemic phase, when the disease has settled into something that our immune systems can better cope with, explained Marc Lipsitch, an infectious diseases epidemiologist at the Harvard School of Public Health.
“It’s not like ‘What is an electron?’”
he told STAT in an interview.
“These are not questions that have right and wrong answers.
I mean, they have some wrong answers, but they don’t have any unique right answers.”
What is clear is that Covid isn’t going anywhere, though the damage it is doing to the human species is declining.
We are getting on with life.
“The death toll is going down and the ability of society to function is going up,” Lipsitch said.
advertisement
Because Covid transmission isn’t going to cease, there is no actual end to point to.
Instead, epidemiologists and medical historians look for signs that the virus is transitioning into something that is more predictable and less dangerous.
That’s a journey whose timing is influenced by both how the virus evolves and how quickly our immune systems acquire the capacity to cope with the new disease.
Newsletters Sign up for Daily Recap All the health and medical news you need today, in one email Please enter a valid email address.
Privacy Policy
When WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus announced the end of the Public Health Emergency of International Concern, there was a valedictory tone to the remarks he and other senior WHO officials made.
Tedros thanked the WHO’s staff for their efforts; Maria Van Kerkhove, the WHO technical lead on coronaviruses, was visibly emotional at a point when she talked about the people who died without family by their bedsides, the funeral pyres some countries used to deal with Covid corpses.
Still, Tedros described the milestone as the end of the emergency phase of Covid, though not the end of the threat Covid poses to people.
Last week, Covid claimed a life every three minutes, he said, “ and that’s just the deaths we know about.”
Lipsitch said he thought the director-general’s framing was the right way to think about where we are now with Covid-19.
Deaths — hovering around 1,000 a week at this point in the United States — are still too high, he said “but lots of things are much worse than they should be and we don’t treat them as emergencies.”
In the U.S., the Covid public health emergency will expire this Thursday, May 11.
Cecile Viboud, an infectious diseases epidemiologist at the National Institutes of Health’s Fogarty International Center, has studied in great detail the 1918 flu pandemic, the worst on record, as well as the three flu pandemics that followed it, in 1957, 1968, and 2009.
Based on her work, Viboud would expect to see the virus behave differently in the post-pandemic phase than it did during the acute crisis.
For instance, she would expect more predictability of when Covid activity would peak and wane — in other words, a discernible seasonality.
The impact of those epidemics would be largely similar, with some fluctuation, sure, but not the high, high spikes of activity seen in the pandemic.
Likewise, the age distribution of cases — or at least the most severe cases — would settle into a pattern.
“I’m not sure we’re quite there,” Viboud said.
“I think we’re in that slow transition phase.”
She acknowledged, though, that this pattern she’s watching for is one based on the tail ends of influenza pandemics.
“That’s all we have,” she said.
The way a coronavirus pandemic ends might look different, she admitted.
“These three years have taught us that you have to remain humble and realize that there might be something that you haven’t thought about, and it could be completely different than you believed.”
That is another problem with trying to figure out when to think about the pandemic as being well and truly over.
We have never experienced a coronavirus pandemic in the age of virology, so there is no history to scour for patterns.
Four other coronaviruses, which are among the viruses that cause what we call the common cold, jumped from some animal source to humans at some point in the past.
But there are no reliable records of any of those events, so if there are signposts we should be looking for, they are unknown to us.
(There is some thought that a pandemic in 1889, known in the history books as the Russian flu, might actually have been the emergence of one of those human coronaviruses, OC43.
But it is — and may remain — only a theory.)
The experts STAT spoke to for this article were not comfortable with saying that the Covid pandemic is over.
But they shared the WHO’s opinion that it is in a different phase.
“I agree that we may be on the backside of this pandemic.
And I think that every piece of data that we’ve seen in the last four months would support that,” said Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Diseases Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota.
But a looming question remains about what will happen with the evolution of the virus.
Will a major new variant of concern, a version of the virus that is as different from Omicron as Omicron was from Delta, emerge and cause a large new wave of infections?
Experts hope not, but say there’s no way to know for sure.
The WHO indicated it might need to declare another public health emergency, were that to happen.
“At this point, we won’t know for some time if in fact this is going to continue to wane, and [we’re] going to continue to see a reduced number of severe illnesses, hospitalizations, and deaths.
Everything right now says it will.
But I reserve that judgment.
You can’t say it’s over,” Osterholm said.
Viboud agreed that we’ll have a better sense years down the road of how to define the period of the Covid-19 pandemic.
“Ten years from now we’ll be able to say,
oh yeah, this is when things went back to normal.”
She’s not as concerned, though, about the emergence of a new variant, suggesting we’ll be better equipped to deal with it.
“By that point, the entire population will have seen Covid — many, many different types of Covid — many times, and [some will have been] vaccinated many times,” she said.
“I think a new variant, even if it was Omicron-like, would not have the same impact Omicron had, just because the immune landscape is different.”
In some respects, the end of a pandemic isn’t just about the behavior of a virus, or of our ability to cope with the infection it causes.
The willingness of people to make concessions to the virus is also a contributing factor.
Historian John Barry, who wrote a bestselling book about the 1918 pandemic, “The Great Influenza,” noted that in some places in the United States, the flu activity in 1920 was as deadly as what was seen in three waves in 1918 and 1919.
But historians don’t consider that activity as part of the Spanish flu pandemic — because public health authorities at the time didn’t characterize that activity as a fourth wave, and they did not impose any measures to try to limit spread.
“Nobody did anything.
You had one-third more deaths, in a shorter time frame, in 1920 in Detroit than you had during the fall outbreak of 1918.
And yet nothing was done,” Barry said.
He has been observing a similar desire to move on from Covid, noting that while he’s still invited to give talks about the pandemic, the audiences he speaks to are getting smaller and smaller.
In December, he was a featured speaker at a conference of hematologists, an event that brought 30,000 physicians and researchers to New Orleans, where Barry lives.
The session was booked for a huge hall.
He estimates about 200 people attended the talk.
“These are people who are scientists.
And obviously one of the main issues with Covid is its impact on various blood disorders and clotting and so on,” Barry said.
“Even the medical community doesn’t want to hear about it.”
Panel data and sample issues
We conducted an original empirical work based on a 96 countries dataset between the first of January and the 15th of July 2020, covering the entire “first wave” of the pandemic.
As mentioned earlier, we only focused on the first wave to minimize the biases, which might be raised from updating beliefs from human behavior.
In addition, we can disentangle the interference with other government policies, vaccination, and non-pharmaceutical policies since these regulations did not happen intensively and interactively.
For the first section, we obtain a panel with 96 countries and around 7359 observations.
We collected (1) the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases and deaths for the countries in our sample from the European Center for Disease, Control and Prevention between 1st January 2020 and July, 15th 2020, (2) the estimated population in 2019 from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database, and (3) the mask-wearing variable from the Kreuter et al. study from University of Maryland using the Facebook platform50.
Our mask wearing variable is based on the Covid-19 World Survey Data API29 and50.
The surveys ask respondents how many people in their household are experiencing Covid-19-like symptoms, among other questions.
These surveys are voluntary, and individual survey responses are held by University of Maryland and are shareable with other health researchers under a data use agreement.
No individual survey responses are shared back to Facebook.
Using this survey response data, we estimate the percentage of people in a given geographic region that use face mask cover.
We use the smoothed weighted (two sets of sample respondents separately are used (CMU US and UMD global surveys))
percentage of survey respondents across an one week window that have reported use mask cover (see also https://covidmap.umd.edu/document/css_methods_brief.pdf for more details).
The descriptive statistics (average mask-wearing proportion, in SI Appendix) seem coherent with other sources from the literature.
For example, data based on Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington in Seattle reported in the USA.
While Fetzer et al.30 and Van Bavel et al.86 constructed weights that account for the differential sample size across countries, the mask-wearing variable approach is also consistent with the previous data processing.
By doing this, the dataset can be eliminated the sampling bias from country differences.
The dimension of our panel (96 countries) has been constrained by data availability about our main interest ‘mask’ variable and a significant number of respondents to the mask adoption survey.
The countries in our sample have not encountered the first wave of the pandemic quite in the same time and the responsiveness rate about the mask wearing variable can be different between high-income and development countries.
Thus, we also used an alternative proxy for mask use as a robustnes check by computing a dummy variable taking 1 for periods since when the government of the country has instated a mask requirements policy, following Chernozhukov et al.15 and Leffler et al.52.
Considering only European countries as a robustness check enables us to focus on countries with high responsiveness levels about the mask wearing variable to maximize the quality of the available information for this variable of great interest in our study.
We also estimate our model on non European Countries and Asian countries separately (in SI Appendix).
In addition, we have to take into account the fact that we have a panel of 96 countries with an important heterogeneity concerning the take-off Covid-19 periods (time with the first infected people) and so different Covid-19 dynamics over time: the first wave of Covid-19 epidemic has started later in Brazil than in Italy.
Considering only homogeneous European countries is therefore a mean to test the presence of sample bias.
We will show that results reported on European countries in our database are completely in accordance with the global results conducted on the global 96 countries sample.
Definitions of variables and data sources
The paper is divided into two parts.
The first one deals with mask effectiveness using panel data, and the second one deals with mask adoption drivers using cross-section data.
In the following subsection, we would like to depict our data features as well as the relevant literature for choosing these following determinants in our models.
Regarding the panel data group, there are seven main variables that we used to construct the panel data set to estimate the effectiveness of wearing masks on infected cases and deaths.
To be more precise, we have Casepop and Deathpop presenting Covid-19 cases and deaths on a daily basis.
In addition, \(New\_tests\) and Masks demonstrate the daily number of new Covid-19 tests per thousand and the number of individuals reporting a mask use, respectively.
Furthermore, Stringency was collected to perform as a proxy for responsive government policies with several sub-categories.
More importantly, Temperatures and Mobility were employed to capture the daily average temperature in each region and changes in human mobility.
The detailed description for each variable can be found in Appendix (section 1.1).
The current literature also confirms that the stringent policies could predict the COVID-19 outcomes76, even the strengthened features of the political regime47.
Additionally, there is a correlation between the number of tests and reported cases and deaths (per capita), implying a must to control the country’s policies to detect the infected cases36,45.
More importantly, differences in average temperature could significantly correlate with the transition of the disease even in an empirical study67 or meta-analysis with 517 papers61.
The lower the human mobility, the lower the COVID-19 cases.
These effects can be explained by the fewer social interactions14,68,89.
To sum up, based on the previous literature, our estimations are designed rigorously and consider the previously updated literature to maintain reliable findings.
When it comes to the cross-sectional data, we constructed our data at the country-level to cover the socio-economic determinants.
To be more precise, we capture the population features (Population density - Density; the aging population - Age65), environmental degradation (CO2), chronic diseases (Diabetic and Overweight), economic and educational status (economic status as GDP, school enrollment as School or reading ability PISA), differences in cultural and behavioral dimensions (Altruism index, Tolerance index, \(Risk\_aversion\) index, and political trust \(Government\_confidence\)).
All variables’ descriptions can be found in Appendix 1.2.
These determinants as mentioned above, were acknowledged in the extant literature.
Accordingly, the effects of population characteristics, including density and aging, significantly correlate with the COVID-19 severity10,65.
This relationship is very intuitive because the higher population density represents the greater proportion of people who gather in common places, which exposes the higher risk of transmission.
In addition, Viscusi87 contributes empirical evidence that the percentage of elderly people could positively predict the COVID-19 mortality rate per million population after controlling other factors such as the ranking of the health system, population density, economic freedom index, etc. for 180 countries.
This finding is also consistent with the existing literature since the elder, known as those who are older than 65 years old, should be classified into the vulnerable group in society38,56.
Since our cross-sectional data looks at the mask adoption drivers, environmental problems, proxied by the carbon emission level, should be included in the model.
However, no study directly explores the inter-relationship between pollutants, mask-wearing, and COVID-19, the preliminary results of Persico & Johnson72 highlight that environmental degradation could positively contribute to the severity to COVID-19 infections.
Concomitantly, the theoretical framework of Gondim33 admitted that several countries had the previous experience to deal with epidemics of respiratory diseases because of wearing surgical masks in public (See more at A quick history of why Asians wear surgical masks in public.).
Therefore, we would like to control the environmental situation in our cross-sectional data.
It is also worth mentioning that the large-scale survey from 49,968 participants across 67 countries of Van Bavel et al.86 indicates that social identity and collective behavior could correlate with the non-pharmaceutical interventions.
Motivated by this finding, we would like to acknowledge the role of socioeconomic status and behavioral factors in our models.
Therefore, we further address why people wear masks from different perspectives with the diversity of control variables, even social and behavioral determinants86.
SI Appendix (Table S22 and following one) shows more detail of our descriptive statistics for all variables.
Overall, there is no perfect correlation among predictors, reflecting the characteristics of the worldwide COVID-19 situation.
To elaborate our motivation and rationale choices for these variables, this study attempts to extend the variables options from the English et al.27 with the time dimension.
By using a single country context (China), the study emphasizes that the number of days that could reduce the spread of the virus is around 14 to 21 days.
Therefore, this study reapplies the evidence regarding the specific days for mask effectiveness.
More noticeably, the literature review study of Howard et al.39 pointed out the majority of determinants of mask-wearing effectiveness.
Therefore, we put these factors into account the global scope.
The econometric panel model to assess mask effectiveness
To empirically test the effect of mask adoption on Covid-19 outcomes, we use a dynamic panel econometric model as follows:
$$\begin{aligned} \begin{aligned} y_{i,t} = \alpha _{0} + \underbrace{\alpha _{1} y_{i,t-1} + \alpha _{2} y_{i,t-k}}_{\text {pandemic dynamic effect}} + \underbrace{ \alpha _{3} C_{i,t-p}}_{\text {lagged mask effect}} + \alpha _{4} X_{i,t-p} + \mu _{i} + \delta _{t} + \varepsilon _{i,t} \end{aligned} \end{aligned}$$ (1)
Where the subscripts i and t represent country index and periods (days) respectively.
The dependent variable, \(y_{i,t}\), can be the number of infected individuals (casespop) or deaths (deathpop) per capita (considering the population size) at time t. \(C_{i,t-p}\) is a vector of variables depicting the effects of mask wearing in day \(t-p\).
A vector of controls \(X_{i,t-p}\) is included to deal with omitted bias and endogeneity issues.
Country-specific fixed effect, \(\mu _i\), are included to control for time-invariant omitted-variable bias and \(\varepsilon _{i,t}\) is the error term.
\(\delta _{t}\) is a deterministic time trend that controls the deterministic dynamics of the epidemics over the studied period and captures some unobserved information about the pandemic common to all countries such as learning effects (see24 about including time trend to capture time-variant unobservables in panel MG regressions).
Hence, our model captures both deterministic dynamics (the ’natural cycle’ of the virus) via deterministic trends and stochastic dynamics via the AutoRegressive structure.
In addition, lagged terms \(y_{i,t-k}\) capture the stochastic part of the pandemic dynamics.
Considering lags in epidemic dynamics is crucial on an theoretical/epidemiological point of view but also for causal identification concerns.
Previous literature (Karaivanov20, Greenhalg et al. (2020)) have identified that threat perceptions about the current crisis can change the mask adoption and so human behaviors leading to potential reverse causality concerns (i.e. the concern that causality flows from COVID-19 to face mask use rather than from face mask use to COVID-19).
Including lagged values of the explanatory variable in our model is a mean to deal with potential reverse causality issues.
However, the use of lagged explanatory variables is sometimes insufficient to create the exogeneity necessary for causal claims as pointed out by Bellemare, Masaki, and Pepinsky8 or Leszczensky and Wolbring53.
In addition, there is a theoretical rationale for including lagged values of the independent variables in our model considering the epidemiological literature.
In line with Chernozhukov et al.15 and Damette et al.21, we assume that the Covid-19 policies and behaviors affect cases and deaths with time lags: two weeks between changes in behavior or policies, and changes in reported cases are considered.
Indeed, we assume k equal to 7 or 14 lags/days in our baselines specifications.
This delay, in the way of Chernozhukov et al. (2020), is related to the existence of incubation (the time from infection to symptom onset) and confirmation periods (the time between symptoms or/and infection and infection and when a person is tested and appears in our data).
Siordia81 show that the mean incubation time is estimated to around 3-9 days (see also Lauer et al.51) whereas Cereda et al.12 estimated an average of 7.3 days between symptom onset and reporting (a range between 1 to 20 days is considered in the literature) and Linton et al.57 and Sanche et al.80 estimated an average of 15-16 days from onset to fatality.
Moreover, for logical reasons, since the mask wearing do not immediately impact the Covid-19 spread, the mask wearing variables are also included in our model with a lag of order p.
Indeed, there are delays between the time of potential avoided infection corresponding to mask wearing and the time of official counting of a potential infected individuals (or fatality).
Therefore, when dealing with p, a minimum of 7 to 14 days is considered.
A benchmark 28 lags (about one month) delay is considered when dealing with deathpop because of the more important lag length assumed between the infection and the deaths related to the Covid-19 virus.
More longer delays of 42 and 56 days have been also considered in robustness checks to take into account the dynamic persistence of the pandemic (see also SI Appendix), the delay between the infection time and potential health problems and potential data reporting bias.
casepop and deathpop respectively give a short-run and medium/long-run time perspective of the dramatic outcomes of the pandemic.
Note that when \(y_{i,t}\) is the fatality rate, we also add the ratio of infected cases per capita in our benchmark specification in order to account for the fact that the level of the pandemic can impact the fatality rate.
The reason behind is to control for a level effect and a kind of saturation effect of the health system (too many infected individuals to manage is likely to finally increase the fatality rate).
Identification issues and endogeneity
Equation (1) can be estimated by the mean group (MG) estimator introduced by73.
Both estimators are relevant for macro panels such as the one used in this paper: T is equal to 84 and is thus close to \(N=96\) (see SI Appendix).
The Mean Group (MG) estimator consists in estimating each regression separately for each panel member i (country here) with a minimum of restrictions.
All estimated coefficients are heterogeneous and are subsequently averaged across countries via a simple unweighted average (Pesaran and Smith, 1995; Eberhard and Presbitero, 2015;
Samargandi et al., 2020).
An intercept is included to capture country fixed effects as well as a linear trend.
In the dynamic fixed effects (DFE), the slopes are homogeneous but the intercepts are allowed to vary across countries.
Although we apply appropriate macro-panel estimators to our data, several issues can nonetheless emerge.
First, lot of dynamic models are vulnerable to the so-called Nickel bias.
Here, this bias is very negligible, notably considering the important time length of our series.
Second, panel regressions may be exposed to an omitted variables bias.
It would be possible to include control variables such as other control measures (e.g. testing, travel controls) or structural determinants (e.g. population density and demographics such as the population over 65, tourists flows, GDP per capita, and measures of health infrastructures).
Considering the so-called problem of ’bad controls’, our set of explanatory variables is assumed to be restricted to the mask variable in order to avoid an over-controlling problem23.
In addition, considering data availability and the fact they are time-invariant variables, we capture these unobservables via the lagged term \(y_{i,t-1}\) and above all with country fixed effects.
Another identification issue is related to the potential reverse causality bias related to our Covid-19 variables: news about contemporaneous dynamics of the Covid-19 outbreaks and counts can change the human behavior in real time, the social distancing and mask adoption.
This is the explanation why lags of dependent variables must be added in our model to control reverse causality bias.
We also tried to add the policy stringency index and the number of tests to take into account confounding and simultaneity.
Thus, our empirical work is able to properly make causal identification and not only correlation.
In addition, we take into account the presence of some cross-sectional dependence following Chudik et al.17, Pesaran74 and Chudik and Pesaran18 and19.
Indeed, MG estimator is consistent under the assumption of independent cross-sectional errors.
This assumption is likely to be not plausible in our context since the pandemic might have triggered unobserved common shocks that led to cross-sectional error dependence.
Thus, we test the weak cross-sectional independence suitable for unbalanced panels74 and then relax cross-sectional error independence by following the existing literature and adding contemporaneous and lagged average variables (An alternative way would be to use a GMM estimator in the vein of Anderson and Hsiao, Blundell and Bond, or Arellano and Bond, but they are better suited for small time dimension panels.).
Finally, persistence and multicollinearity are other usual issues in panel studies.
We have controlled for both by computing autocorrelations LM (Lagrange Multiplier) tests and VIF/Tolerance ratios after each estimated regression.
In Appendix, we also consider other robustness tests related to the specification of our econometric model, the choice of an alternative estimator, and several changes in the sample composition.
The Cross-section model to investigate face mask adoption
We collect data from different sources (SI Appendix) to estimate a very simple cross-section model of the following form at a country level:
$$\begin{aligned} \begin{aligned} y_{i} = \alpha _{0} + \alpha _{1} X_{i} + \varepsilon _{i} \end{aligned} \end{aligned}$$ (2)
where \(y_{i}\) captures proportion of individuals declaring wearing a face mask on 15th of July, 2020 and \(X_{i}\) is a set of control variables including population density, CO2 emissions (and squared CO2 emissions), GDP level (in logarithms), government effectiveness index, altruism index, individualism index, tolerance index, risk aversion index, trust in government index, Covid-19 policy stringency index, urban population percentage, education level, diabetic population percentage and overweight population percentage have been considered.
We also assume that the dynamics of the epidemics proxied by the count of cases is also a potential driver of masks wearing propensity.
We also test as a robustness check the same model with mask wearing data on April, 23, 2020 corresponding to the first available and oldest data from the Maryland survey.
Other variables (overweight part of the population, testing, surveillance, travel restrictions and school closures policies) have been introduced (see in SI Appendix).
IPS continues to update the district’s health and safety protocols per guidance from the Marion County Public Health Department (MCPHD), the Indiana Department of Health (IDOH) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
These protocols are subject to change based on new guidance from the health departments/organizations listed above.
Resources
Face Masks
The IDOH has advised that masking students and staff may be optional.
Students/families and staff may decide for themselves whether to wear masks on IPS property and it is no longer district policy that they are required to do so.
Per CDC guidance, masks are no longer required for all students, staff and drivers on IPS buses.
Health Screening/Testing
Each day, students and employees will need to monitor whether they have COVID-like symptoms.
Those who develop COVID-like symptoms will need to stay at home and not attend school or participate in the activity.
IPS continues to encourage testing when anyone is exhibiting symptoms.
Tests are available at all IPS locations.
Positive Cases/Isolation
The CDC and IDOH isolation guidance for K-12 settings has not changed.
Students and staff who has tested positive for COVID will be required to isolate for a minimum of 5 full days.
Staff/students may return to work/school only if: Symptoms have significantly improved, including no fever within 24 hours without the use of fever-reducing medication.
The individual wears a well-fitting mask consistently and correctly at all times, including when outdoors while not eating or drinking for days 6-10
Positive cases in children ages 2 to 5 years of age: Children testing positive for COVID must isolate at home for 5 days May return on day 6 if fever free for 24 hours without medication AND can correctly and consistently mask.
If cannot correctly and consistently mask should isolate at home for 7 days, returning on day 8.
IPS will remain vigilant to changes in school and community COVID cases and will adjust mitigation measures accordingly.
Contact Tracing/Quarantine
IPS school leaders will notify their whole community each instance there is a confirmed case of COVID-19 in the building.
The IDOH no longer recommends identifying or quarantining close contacts regardless of vaccination status.
This includes if there is a positive individual in the household.
However, continue to monitor individuals for symptoms.
Anyone with symptoms should not return to school unless they are fever free for at least 24 hours without the use of medication and symptoms are resolving.
Again, testing for COVID-19 is still recommended for anyone exhibiting symptoms.
Cleaning/Sanitizing/Hygiene & PPE
All high-touch surfaces will be cleaned and sanitized in school and office buildings and on buses.
Proper hand washing, cough and sneeze protocols are required.
No-touch water bottle filling stations available in schools.
Social Distancing — Classrooms/Cafeterias/Buses
Social distancing is no longer required.
Visitors & Volunteers
Volunteers, visitors and families may be in buildings by scheduled appointment, and interactions within classrooms should be limited.
IPS strongly encourages that any vendors or external partners should ensure they are vaccinated and boosted to reduce their individual risk in schools.
Events can be held in person.
We encourage schools to offer virtual or recorded offerings for families.
PE & Recess
Masks are optional during PE indoors.
Athletics & Extracurriculars
Schools can resume normal student movement and seating.
Social distancing is no longer required.
Testing/Vaccination
Currently for 6 months and older, receiving the COVID-19 vaccine is the best way to protect yourself and others from the virus.
Read more HERE.
IPS will continue to encourage vaccination for all eligible populations and host vaccination clinics with community partners.
Students are still encouraged to provide proof of vaccination status:
Staff should continue to provide proof of vaccination status: Vaccinated can provide proof of vaccination to the IPS HR Department.
IPS Vaccine and Immunization Clinics
IPS will continue to host vaccination clinics throughout the school year.
These clinics include COVID-19 vaccines (1st, 2nd and booster shots) and school-required and recommended immunizations (including DTap, Polio, MMR, Hepatitis, flu, etc.).
COVID-19 Citywide Vaccine Sites:
Vaccine sites are conveniently located throughout the city.
Click HERE for locations.
COVID-19 Citywide Testing Sites:
COVID testing information and testing sites can be found HERE.
*Page updated July 28, 2022.
Revive Therapeutics Ltd. today announced that it has filed a provisional patent application titled “Compositions, methods and uses of Bucillamine in the treatment of a victim exposed to a chemical warfare agent.”
The methods and compositions described in the patent application relate to Bucillamine as a potential treatment of a victim exposed to a chemical agent, including chemical warfare agents such as sulfur mustards, nitrogen mustards, nerve agents of G and V type, lewisite and adamsite.
On July 6, the Revive announced the results of its Phase 3 clinical study evaluating the safety and efficacy of oral Bucillamine in patients with mild to moderate COVID-19.
The study did not achieve statistical significance on the clinical endpoints.
According to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, a chemical attack is the spreading of toxic chemicals with the intent to do harm, which may include chemical weapons (warfare agents) developed for military use, toxic industrial and commercial chemicals that are produced, transported, and stored in the making of petroleum, textiles, plastics, fertilizers, paper, foods, pesticides, household cleaners, and other products, and chemical toxins of biological origin such as ricin.
Revive Therapeutics is commencing work with advisors in developing a strategic plan to present its case in repurposing Bucillamine as a potential medical countermeasure for chemical warfare agent exposures to the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA), a part of the Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response (ASPR) in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Bucillamine is currently indicated to treat rheumatoid arthritis in Japan and South Korea.
Transient spike-specific CD8+ T cell booster responses
To assess the longevity of boosted adaptive effector responses, we longitudinally collected sera and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 13 volunteers (Supplementary Table 1) before and after 3rd mRNA vaccination with Comirnaty/Pfizer-Biontech or Spikevax/Moderna (Supplementary Fig. 1a).
All volunteers included in this cohort did not have a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection and received their vaccinations with a three-week interval between 1st and 2nd and six-to-nine-months interval between 2nd and 3rd dose.
First, we analyzed the kinetics of the spike-specific CD8+ T cell response targeting the A*01/S 865 (n = 7) or A*02/S 269 epitope (n = 8).
A*01/S 865 - and A*02/S 269 -specific CD8+ T cells are part of a broader CD8+ T cell response targeting the spike protein after mRNA vaccination and dominant with respect to the restricting HLA class I allele3,10.
The targeted epitopes are highly conserved in all VOCs, including the Omicron variants BA.1
and BA.2 (Supplementary Fig.
1b) but not in common cold coronaviruses3.
To increase the detection sensitivity of spike-specific CD8+ T cells targeting single epitopes, we performed peptide-loaded MHC-class I tetramer-based enrichment3,11 (Supplementary Fig. 1c).
Spike-specific CD8+ T cell frequencies had already reached their set point approx.
60 days after the 2nd dose and were rapidly boosted with peak expansion one week after the 3rd dose in all tested donors (Fig. 1a).
Robust boosting of the spike-specific CD8+ T cell response by the 3rd dose was also reflected by high CD38, Ki-67 and T-BET expression and thus by rapid activation, strong proliferation and substantial induction of an effector cell program (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 2a).
However, within 30-60 days the circulating spike-specific CD8+ T cell frequency, activation, proliferation and effector cell differentiation decreased rapidly to a similar level as before the 3rd dose (Fig. 1a, b and Supplementary Fig. 2a), thus following the same kinetics as after the 2nd dose.
Similarities between the spike-specific CD8+ T cell response after the 2nd and 3rd dose, respectively, are also supported by t-distributed stochastic neighborhood embedding (t-SNE) and pseudotemporal diffusion analysis of T cell phenotypes including CD38, T-BET, BCL-2, PD-1, and TOX expression (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Fig.
2b, c).
Phenotypic differences (e.g., in T-BET and TOX expression) were detectable between the spike-specific CD8+ T cell response after the 1st dose compared to the 2nd and 3rd doses and only minor differences were apparent with respect to the targeted epitopes A*01/S 865 or A*02/S 269 (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Fig.
2b, c).
With respect to the neutralizing antibody response, the boost effect clearly depended on the VOC (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig.
2b; p < 0.0001).
In particular, neutralization was only slightly increased against the Omicron variant BA.1
(B.1.1.529) by the 3rd dose, while neutralization of the parental B.1 strain and Delta (B.1.617.2) peaked after approx.
3 weeks followed by a decrease to baseline neutralization after 4 months (Fig. 2a).
Of note, after the 4th dose similar kinetics (Fig. 2c) and dynamics (Supplementary Fig.
3a–c) of spike-specific CD8+ T cell and neutralizing antibody responses were detectable.
Hence, after booster vaccination, there is a transient mRNA vaccine-associated spike-specific CD8+ T effector cell response and neutralizing antibody boost lasting about 2 and 4 months, respectively.
Fig.
1: Cellular and humoral effector response after the 3rd vaccine dose.
Calculated ex vivo frequencies of spike-specific CD8+ T cells throughout 1st, 2nd and 3rd vaccination (a).
Ki-67,and
CD38 expression within spike-specific non-naïve CD8+ T cells (b).
t-SNE representation of flow cytometry data comparing A*01/S 865 - and A*02/S 269 -specific CD8+ T cells at peak response after 1st, 2nd and 3rd vaccination.
Expression levels of CD38, T-BET, BCL-2, PD-1 and TOX are depicted (c).
Statistical significance was determined by two-way ANOVA with main model (a, b) comparing the effects of targeted epitopes (p e ) and of the time course (p t ).
Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
Full size image
Fig.
2: Humoral response after the 3rd vaccine dose.
Antibody neutralization activity as 50% plaque reduction neutralization tests (PRNT50) for SARS-CoV-2 variants B.1, B.1.617.2 and B.1.1.529 after 3rd vaccination.
Median values are depicted with 95% confidence interval error bars with n = 28 individual tested (a).
Quantification of serum anti-SARS-CoV-2 spike IgG levels following 3rd vaccination with n = 26 individuals tested (b).
Calculated ex vivo frequencies of A*01/S 865 - (left) and A*02/S 269 -specific (right) CD8+ T cells, with antibody neutralization activity after 4th vaccination (c).
Median values are depicted with 95% confidence interval error bars.
Statistical significance was calculated by Kruskal-Wallis test (a) comparing the effects of time course (p t < 1×10−14).
Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
Full size image
Stable T memory cell response irrespective of booster immunization
To investigate the effect of booster immunization on long-term spike-specific CD8+ T cell immunity, we comparatively analyzed the spike-specific CD8+ T cell response after three and nine months post 2nd dose versus three months after the 3rd dose.
The memory T cell subset distribution (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Fig. 4a, b) and activation/differentiation footprint (Fig.
3b and Supplementary Fig.
4c) of spike-specific CD8+ T cells were similar at the tested time points, indicating stable memory features without a clear effect of the 3rd dose.
Of note, during the effector phase after the 3rd vaccine shot, a transient subset redistribution was detectable (Supplementary Fig.
5a–c).
To more precisely quantify and characterize the T cell memory compartment, we analyzed on the one hand, spike-specific CD8+ T cells highly expressing BCL-2 (BCL-2hi) to map the overall memory pool irrespective of certain subsets and on the other hand, focused on T memory stem cells (T SCM , defined by expression of CD45RA, CCR7, CD27, CD28 and CD95; Supplementary Fig. 4a) that are essential for long-term T cell immunity12.
Spike-specific BCL2hi CD8+ T cells and CD8+ T SCM cells were induced after the 1st dose and their frequencies remained stable after the 2nd dose throughout the subsequent vaccination (Fig.
3c, d).
t-SNE analysis revealed that spike-specific BCL-2hi CD8+ T cells showed minor phenotypic differences such as higher T-BET expression 3 months post 2nd and 3rd dose compared to 9 months after the 2nd dose (Fig. 3e and Supplementary Fig. 5d) probably reflecting a more resting state at later time points post immunization.
In contrast, phenotypic characteristics of CD8+ T SCM remained completely stable, indicated by a complete intermingling within the t-SNE analysis (Fig. 3f).
Furthermore, the spike-specific CD8+ T cell memory pool was also conserved during and after the 4th dose (Supplementary Fig.
6a–c).
Thus, these results indicate that booster immunizations give rise to a rapid effector T cell response that is based on a stable T cell memory pool as illustrated by a subset of spike-specific CD8+ T cells expressing high levels of BCL-2 in parallel to T-BEThi, PD-1hi, TOX+ subsets at peak expansion after booster immunization (Supplementary Fig. 3a).
Fig. 3: Spike-specific CD8+ T memory cells before and after the 3rd vaccine dose.
Composition of spike-specific CD8+ T cell memory subsets at 3 (n = 7) and 9 (n = 11) months after 2nd, and 3 (n = 11) months after 3rd vaccination (a).
Molecule expression of spike-specific non-naïve CD8+ T cells at 3 (n = 8) and 9 (n = 12) months after 2nd, and 3 (n = 11) months after 3rd vaccination normalized to bulk naïve CD8+ T cells ( b ) .
Calculated ex vivo frequencies of BCL-2hi (c) and T SCM (d) spike-specific CD8+ T cells.
t-SNE representation of BCL-2hi (e) and T SCM (f) spike-specific CD8+ T cells at 3 and 9 months after 2nd, and 3 months after 3rd vaccination.
Expression levels of CCR7, TCF-1 and T-BET are depicted for BCL-2hi, and CD127, CD11a, CXCR3 and CD27 are depicted for T SCM spike-specific CD8+ T cells.
Statistical significance was calculated by two-way ANOVA with full model and Tukey’s test for multiple comparison (a, b) to examine the effect of sampling time points (p t ) on memory subsets and marker expression, and two-way ANOVA with main model (c, d) to compare the effects of targeted epitopes (p e ) and time course (p t ).
Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
Full size image
Conserved spike-specific CD8+ T cell recall capacity
Next, we analyzed the recall capacity of spike-specific CD8+ T cells after the 3rd dose.
For this, we stained for TCF-1 expression, a transcription factor indicative of the proliferative capacity of T cells13.
The frequencies of TCF-1+ spike-specific CD8+ T cells were stable suggesting a conserved pool of proliferative competent T cells throughout the 2nd and 3rd dose (Fig. 4a).
Accordingly, the peptide-specific in vitro expansion capacity of spike-specific CD8+ T cells was also conserved before and after the 3rd dose (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Fig.
7a, b).
Furthermore, after two weeks of expansion, spike-specific CD8+ T cells produced similar amounts of IFNγ and TNF, including co-production irrespective of whether the input cells were obtained before or after the 3rd dose (Fig. 4c and Supplementary Fig.7c, d).
Spike-specific production of IFNγ and TNF were assessed in relation to the frequency of spike-specific CD8+ T cells after expansion as a measure of the effector function per cell.
In order to estimate the cytotoxic potential of spike-specific CD8+ T cells after in vitro expansion, we analyzed degranulation as indicated by CD107a expression in relation to the frequency of spike-specific CD8+ T cells (Fig. 4d and Supplementary Fig. 7e) and Granzyme B (Fig. 4e) and Perforin (Fig. 4f) expression of spike-specific CD8+ T cells.
Similar to cytokine production, the cytotoxic potential was also largely conserved with almost all spike-specific CD8+ T cells expressing Granzyme B and Perforin.
Thus, recall capacity tested in vitro comprising expansion capacity, differentiation to cytokine-producing and cytotoxic effector cells is robust and stable before and after 3rd vaccination.
Fig. 4: Reactivation capacity of spike-specific CD8+ T cells before and after the 3rd vaccine dose.
Calculated ex vivo frequencies of TCF-1+ non-naive spike-specific CD8+ T cells (a).
Expansion capacity of spike-specific CD8+ T cells over 14 days of in vitro expansion throughout 1st, 2nd and 3rd vaccination (b).
Percentage of IFNγ and TNF (c), and CD107a (d) producing CD8+ T cells upon peptide stimulation related to the percentage of spike-specific CD8+ T cells from all CD8+ T cells at 3 (n = 10) and 9 (n = 12 for c, n = 11 for d) months post 2nd, and 3 (n = 11) months post 3rd vaccination after in vitro expansion.
Median values are depicted with 95% confidence interval error bars.
Expression of Granzyme B (e) and Perforin (f) of spike-specific CD8+ T cells at 3 (n = 6) and 9 (n = 12) months post 2nd, and 3 months (n = 10 for e, n = 11 for f) post 3rd vaccination after in vitro expansion with representative histograms.
Median values are depicted with 95% confidence interval error bars.
Statistical significance was calculated by two-way ANOVA with main model (a, b) to compare the effects of targeted epitopes (p e ) and time course (p t ), two-way ANOVA with full model and Tukey’s multiple comparison test (c), and Kruskal-Wallis test (d, e, f) to examine the effect of sampling time on functionality (p t ).
Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
Full size image
Recall response in breakthrough infections
To determine the recall capacity in vivo and to compare booster responses of vaccine-elicited CD8+ T cell responses after vaccination versus infection, we next analyzed spike-specific CD8+ T cells and the neutralizing antibody capacity in breakthrough infections.
Specifically, we compared the adaptive effector immune response after the 4th antigen contact, either by the 4th vaccine dose (n = 5) or by breakthrough infection with Omicron (n = 12) or Delta (n = 2) after three mRNA vaccine doses.
The spike-specific CD8+ T cell response was rapidly and robustly induced and similar after the 4th vaccine dose versus an Omicron or Delta breakthrough infection (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Fig. 8a).
Spike-specific CD8+ T cells peaked in a classical effector cell response with pronounced expression of CD38, Ki-67 and T-BET (Fig. 5b and Supplementary Fig.
8a–c).
Variations within the proportion of spike-specific CD8+ T cells expressing these markers may be due to differences in infection time point or time point of symptom onset, which is especially relevant in breakthrough infections with Omicron that are often characterized by mild symptoms in vaccinated individuals.
However, within one to two months after breakthrough infection and 4th vaccine dose, a fully functional early T cell memory was present with similar reactivation capacities comprising expansion, cytokine production and degranulation (Fig. 6a and Supplementary Fig. 9a).
Furthermore, phenotypic characteristics of early spike-specific CD8+ T memory cells were similar after breakthrough infections and 4th vaccine dose as depicted by t-SNE analysis including CD38, CCR7, TCF-1 and BCL-2 (Fig. 6b) and memory subset distribution with transitional and effector memory subsets being dominant (Supplementary Fig. 9b).
Again, the frequencies of the BCL-2hi memory pool within the spike-specific CD8+ T cells were stable before and after the 4th antigen contact irrespective of breakthrough infection or 4th vaccine dose (Fig. 6c).
Hence, vaccine-elicited spike-specific CD8+ T cell immunity exhibited a substantial recall capacity in vivo even towards VOCs such as Omicron.
However, the neutralizing antibody response after the 4th antigen contact differed from the spike-specific CD8+ T cells in the following aspects (Fig. 6d):
First, neutralization capacity depended on the targeted SARS-CoV-2 variant regardless of whether the 4th antigen exposure was through vaccination or breakthrough infection.
Second, the neutralizing antibody response depended on the 4th antigen contact with differences in vaccination and breakthrough infections.
Third, the neutralizing antibody response exhibited a prolonged decay after breakthrough infections compared to vaccination.
Thus, in contrast to spike-specific CD8+ T cells, recall of the neutralizing antibody response was less robust with respect to VOCs.
Fig. 5: CD8+ T effector cell response after breakthrough infection and the 4th vaccine dose.
Calculated ex vivo frequencies of spike-specific CD8+ T cells before and after breakthrough infection and 4th vaccination (a).
Proportion of CD38+, Ki-67+ and T-BEThi within non-naive spike-specific CD8+ T cells at peak expansion after breakthrough infection and 4th vaccination with n = 11 for Omicron and n = 2 for Delta breakthrough infections, and n = 4 individuals receiving a 4th vaccination (b).
Statistical significance was calculated by two-way ANOVA with main model to compare the effects of antigen triggers (p a ) on epitope-specific T cell frequencies (a) and two-way ANOVA with full model and Tukey’s test for multiple comparison (b) to examine the effects of antigen triggers on activation marker expression.
Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
Full size image
Are there places you should still mask in, forever?
Three experts weigh in
Enlarge this image toggle caption Joshua Roberts/Getty Images Joshua Roberts/Getty Images
There are still hundreds of thousands of COVID cases reported in the U.S. each week, along with a few thousand deaths related to COVID.
But with mask mandates a thing of the past and the national emergency health declaration that will expire in May, we are in a new phase of the pandemic.
Life looks a little more normal here in the U.S. than it did a few years ago, but decisions on how to deal with the virus aren't over yet.
China had a huge increase in cases last month after abandoning its zero COVID policy, and another variant prompted renewed recommendations in some airports.
Researchers estimate that more than 65 million people are struggling with the effects of COVID — a disease we still have to learn about.
However, masking requirements are being lifted in places like Spain and Germany.
Wondering if and when you should still be masking up?
NPR asked some experts.
Dr. William Schaffner, a professor of infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Dr. Monica Gandhi, an infectious disease expert at the University of California, San Francisco, and Dr. Bob Wachter, chair of the department of medicine at the same university all weighed in.
If you're high risk, you should still be careful
Dr. William Schaffner, a professor of infectious diseases at the Vanderbilt University Medical Center, says he and his wife are still playing it conservatively.
He cautions people to stay "careful, not carefree.
"
As they are older, they are at higher risk of serious illness if they catch the virus.
They also care for a family member who is undergoing chemotherapy.
"Older persons, people of any age who have a serious underlying illness, heart disease, lung disease, diabetes, if you're immune compromised," Schaffner said, "keep wearing that mask.
"
Consider masks in crowded, poorly ventilated places
Dr. Bob Wachter, chair of the Department of Medicine at the University of California, San Francisco, plays it a little more by ear.
"I have come to calibrate my mask wearing based on my best educated guess as to the possibility that someone has COVID and also how important is it for me to do the thing without a mask," Wachter says.
While he's no longer concerned about dying or serious illness, the virus can still knock you out.
Wachter watched firsthand as his wife recovered from a bout of long COVID-19.
He evaluates it case by case.
A small gathering where everyone is vaccinated and windows open may not require one.
But sitting on an airplane or in a large, crowded theater might be a good idea to do one.
"Those places, I'm wearing a mask now, and I suspect I will wear a mask forever," Wachter said.
"Forever's a long time.
But the threat of COVID now, I think, is probably not all that different from it'll be a year from now or five years from now.
"
Vaccines have provided powerful protection
On the other hand, Dr. Monica Gandhi, an infectious disease expert at the University of California, has leaned into the value of vaccines over masks.
"They're really powerful in terms of what they were designed to do, which is to prevent severe disease," Gandhi said.
"This is really the time at which you can say, 'Oh, we have a lot of population immunity in our country.'
"
Most Americans now have hybrid immunity, a combination of immunity from vaccines and catching the virus naturally, which is particularly strong.
Gandhi feels comfortable going without a mask on most of the time.
Keep assessing your own risk and comfort level
All three experts agree it's a matter of weighing personal risks.
"Lots of people are very cautious," Gandhi said.
"Still, they're happy with their vaccine and feel that they're done worrying about it after vaccination.
Everyone's just going to have their own personal biases around that.
"
Experts do not always agree on what to do.
"I don't think it has a moral dimension," Wachter says.
"I think we're sort of past the time when any of the choices here are really bad choices.
"
And Schaffner found that this winter there were other benefits to masking and social distancing — like avoiding RSV and flu bouts.
"We have shown that these things are really effective in reducing risk in a population," he said.
This digital story was edited by Majd Al-Waheidi.
Designing a SARS-CoV-2 decoy
At a Glance
A molecular decoy that neutralizes the SARS-CoV-2 virus by preventing it from latching onto cells protected mice against COVID-19.
This type of decoy may be able to provide protection even as the SARS-CoV-2 virus continues to change over time.
NIAID Integrated Research Facility
Early in the COVID-19 pandemic, monoclonal antibodies played an important role in treating some people with severe disease.
A combination of antibodies was also approved as a prevention strategy for people with certain immune system problems.
As the SARS-CoV-2 virus continues to mutate, the spike protein it uses to enter human cells has changed substantially.
Because of this, the monoclonal antibodies designed to bind earlier versions of the spike have become ineffective over time.
Researchers have been searching for new ways to combat COVID-19 in people with a compromised immune response.
A research team from NYU Langone Health led by Dr. Nathaniel Landau developed a type of molecular decoy designed to tie up the virus in the body before it can enter human cells.
The decoy includes a version of human ACE2, the protein that SARS-CoV-2 latches onto to enter cells.
Since the virus needs to bind ACE2 in order to enter cells, the researchers reasoned that this aspect of the virus’s function, and therefore structure, is unlikely to change much.
The team fused ACE2 to a piece of antibody that helps the immune system attack the virus and clear it from the body.
A harmless version of a virus called AAV was engineered to carry the gene for the decoy.
The virus could then infect cells and instruct them to produce copies of the decoy.
The team tested this new decoy in cells and in mice.
Their results were published on June 6, 2023, in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
In several different cell lines, including those derived from lung and brain tissue, the decoy shut down SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Cells treated with the decoy before being exposed to the virus had levels of virus similar to those in uninfected cells.
The researchers next gave the decoy to mice by three different routes of administration: through the nose, by injection into a muscle, or injection into a vein.
They then exposed the animals to the original SARS-CoV-2 virus three days later.
Both intranasal and intramuscular administration of the decoy provided strong protection against disease.
Similar results were seen when mice were exposed to several different Omicron variants.
Protection appeared to remain strong for at least two months after the mice received the decoy.
The decoy also worked as a treatment when given to mice shortly after infection.
When mice were exposed to SARS-CoV-2, the decoy provided protection when given up to a day after infection.
In people, the timeline for progression from infection to disease is longer than in mice, suggesting that such a decoy could potentially protect people over the course of several days after an exposure.
AAV-based systems are already used to deliver gene therapies.
The researchers also tested a second decoy using a type of virus called a lentivirus.
Decoys based on lentiviruses have the potential to last longer in the body than those based on AAV.
The team saw similar levels of protection with this decoy.
However, further safety studies would be needed before lentiviral-based decoys could be tested in people.
“Decoy-based prevention strategies have the potential to remain useful even as the SARS-CoV-2 virus continues to change, since they’re based on the protein every viral variant needs to infect cells,” Landau says.
—by Sharon Reynolds
CNN —
A young woman stands on her balcony, crying out in desperation after her building was ordered into lockdown.
Fighting back tears, she shouts abuse at the hazmat-suited workers below in a video that has recently gone viral on social media platform Weibo and which appears to encapsulate the Chinese public’s growing frustration with their government’s uncompromising zero-Covid policy.
The woman has been under quarantine for half a year since returning from university in the summer, she shouts at the workers.
They stare back, seemingly unmoved.
While most Asian economies – even those with previously hardline zero-Covid stances – are abandoning pandemic-era restrictions, authorities in China remain zealous in theirs, repeatedly insisting this week in state-run media articles that the battle against the virus remains “winnable.”
That claim comes even as infections flare and a new strain circulates just days before the country’s most important political event, the Communist Party Congress beginning in Beijing on Sunday at which Xi Jinping is expected to cement his place as the country’s most powerful leader in decades.
Observers across the world will be watching the twice-a-decade meeting for signs of the party’s priorities when it comes to its zero-Covid stance, which has been blamed for exacerbating mounting problems in the economy, from stalled growth to a collapsing housing market.
Nerves are high in China’s capital, where online photos posted Thursday appeared to show an exceptionally rare public protest against Xi.
“Say no to Covid test, yes to food.
No to lockdown, yes to freedom.
No to lies, yes to dignity.
No to cultural revolution, yes to reform.
No to great leader, yes to vote.
Don’t be a slave, be a citizen,” read one banner hung over an overpass despite the heightened security surrounding the Congress.
“Go on strike, remove dictator and national traitor Xi Jinping,” read the other.
The protest sent China’s stringent online censorship into overdrive.
Weibo, a Twitter-like platform, immediately censored search results for “Sitong Bridge,” the site of the protest.
Before long, key words including “Beijing,” “Haidian,” “warrior,” “brave man,” and even “courage” were restricted from search.
Numerous accounts on Weibo and WeChat, the super-app essential for daily life in China, have been banned after commenting on – or alluding to – the protest.
Still, many spoke out to express their support and awe.
Some shared the Chinese pop hit “Lonely Warrior” in a veiled reference to the protester, who some called a “hero,” while others swore never to forget, posting under the hashtag: “I saw it.”
Yet even in the face of rising public discontent, all the signs suggest Xi and his party plan to stick with the zero-Covid approach, possibly into 2023, with the state media articles this week serving to dampen speculation the country may change tack post-Congress.
Lockdown, test, repeat
More than 300 million people across dozens of cities in China had been affected by full or partial lockdowns at one point last month, according to CNN’s calculations.
But while the restrictions are lifted and imposed in response to local Covid outbreaks, the virus just keeps on reemerging.
And new outbreaks reported across the country this week suggest more misery could be on the way for China’s citizens – like the woman in the Weibo video – who have grown exhausted by a seemingly endless cycle of lockdowns.
China’s Health Commission on Thursday reported 1,476 locally transmitted Covid-19 cases nationwide, a significant number in a country where even one infection can trigger a city-wide lockdown.
In the northeastern province of Heilongjiang, 900,000 residents in Hegang city have been locked down since Friday after a single case was found.
In Shanghai, where 25 million people have already endured two months of the world’s strictest lockdown, residents are now on edge at any signs of a repeat as authorities begin to tighten measures once again.
A worker wearing protective gear crosses the road near an area placed under lockdown due to Covid-19 in Beijing, China on October 12, 2022.
Bloomberg/Getty Images
The city reported 47 Covid-19 cases on Thursday, one day after authorities ordered six out of its 13 districts to shut entertainment venues such as internet cafes, cinemas and bars.
Shanghai’s Disney resort has suspended some of its attractions and live performances since Sunday.
Spooked by the possibility of unpredictable and unannounced snap lockdowns – and mindful that authorities have previously backtracked after suggesting that no such measures were coming – some people in the city have reportedly been hoarding drinking water.
That panic buying has been made worse by an announcement that Shanghai’s water authorities have taken action to ensure water quality after discovering saltwater inflows to two reservoirs at the mouth of the Yangtze River in September.
Exactly what is driving the increase in infections is not clear, though authorities are scrambling to contain the spread of the BF.7 coronavirus strain after it was first detected in China in late September in Hohhot, the capital city of Inner Mongolia.
The country has also seen an uptick in cases in domestic tourist destinations, despite its strict curbs having discouraged people from traveling or spending over China’s Golden Week holiday in early October.
Hohhot logged 329 cases on Thursday, according to the National Health Commission, which now deems the remote region a high-risk hotspot.
More than 240,000 university students in Inner Mongolia have been locked down on campuses due to the latest outbreak, according to Zhang Xiaoying, a deputy director of the regional Department of Education.
And the outbreak on campus has led to punitive action, with one university Communist Party boss being sacked after 39 students from his institution tested positive.
Then there is the situation in far western Xinjiang, where some 22 million people have been banned from leaving the region and are required to stay home.
Xinjiang recorded 403 new cases on Thursday, according to an official tally.
Yet amid it all, Beijing appears unwilling to move from its hardline stance.
For three days this week, the state-run Communist Party mouthpiece People’s Daily published commentaries reiterating that China would not let its guard down.
“Lying flat is not advisable,” it said in its third commentary, on Wednesday, referring to a Chinese phrase that denotes complacency.
The battle against Covid was winnable, it insisted.
Other countries that had reopened and eased restrictions had done so because they had no choice, it said, as they had failed to “effectively control the epidemic in a timely manner.”
When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.
The coronavirus disease COVID-19 continues to spread at the regional and global levels.
As of 27 August 2022, the global cumulative incidence reached 597 645 130 reported cases and 6 474 881 associated deaths at a case-fatality ratio (CFR) of 1.08%.
Meanwhile, the 22 countries of the Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMR) have reported a total of 22 969 838 cases, representing about 3.84% of the global count, with 347 388 associated deaths (CFR 1.51%).
Most countries in the Region are in the community transmission phase.
Since the beginning of the outbreak, the country that has reported the highest number of total cases in the Region is Islamic Republic of Iran (7 521 969; 32.75% of the Region’s total), followed by Iraq (2 457 871; 10.70%) and Jordan (1 735 495; 7.56%).
Islamic Republic of Iran also reported the highest number of total COVID-19-associated deaths (143 684; CFR 1.91%) followed by Pakistan (30 574; CFR 1.95%) and Tunisia (29 233; CFR 2.56%).
The highest CFRs were reported by Yemen (18.07%) followed by Sudan (7.85%) and Syria (5.56%), while the lowest CFRs were reported by United Arab Emirates (0.23%), Bahrain (0.23) and Qatar (0.16%) respectively.
During epidemiological week 34, the Region reported a decrease in cases by 31% when compared to the previous week (48 327cases compared to 70 339 cases).
A decrease by 20% was also observed for associated deaths (467 deaths in the current week compared to 586 deaths in the previous week).
The weekly number of cases have decreased in all countries of the Region compared to the previous week.
This week the number of COVID-19-associated deaths also decreased in most of the countries except in four out of 22 countries of the Region as compared to the previous week.
*
In terms of testing, a total of 422 580 110 laboratory tests were conducted since the start of the outbreak across the Region including 1 998 646 tests in week 34, which shows a 2% decrease as compared to the previous week when 2 030 375 tests were conducted.
The highest number of PCR tests were reported from United Arab Emirates (183 178 842), followed by Islamic Republic of Iran (53 743 896) and Saudi Arabia (44 092 371).
The average positivity rate for the Region is 5.44%.
WHO recommends a positivity rate of around 3% to 12% as a general benchmark indicating adequate testing, which was achieved in most countries of the Region.
Meanwhile, COVID-19 vaccination continues across the Region.
The total number of doses administered so far in the 22 countries is 819 217 295.
Pakistan has administered the highest number of doses at 307 354 160 followed by Islamic Republic of Iran at 153 666 785 and Egypt at 97 258 642.
On the other hand, Bahrain (3 466 865), Yemen (880 609) and Djibouti (242 916) administrated the lowest number of COVID-19 doses in the Region.
**
Supporting countries in the Region
The regional incident management support team continues to coordinate the response and provide technical support to countries and partners in the Region in the areas of coordination and partnership, surveillance, laboratory capacity, clinical management, infection prevention and control, risk communication and community engagement, points of entry according to the International Health Regulations (2005), research, health systems, and essential health services among others.
For more data from the Region, please visit the COVID-19 dashboard.
Subscribe to the monthly infectious hazard preparedness newsletter of WHO’s Health Emergencies Programme for the latest data and analysis on the epidemic- and pandemic-prone diseases, as well as news on outbreak preparedness and response within WHO’s Eastern Mediterranean Region.
Many gyms and health clubs seem to be filling up again with people eager to return to their old routines and communities or get in shape for summer, at the same time that new Omicron variants are pushing Covid infections up.
So, how safe is it to go back to the gym?
Put another way, how many microscopic aerosol particles are the other cyclists in your spin class breathing out into the room?
How many is the runner on the nearby treadmill spewing forth?
A small study about respiration and exercise published Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences provides some rather startling answers.
The study looked at the number of aerosol particles 16 people exhaled at rest and during workouts.
These tiny bits of airborne matter — measuring barely a few hundred micrometers in diameter, or about the width of a strand of hair, and suspended in mist from our lungs — can transmit coronavirus if someone is infected, ferrying the virus lightly through the air from one pair of lungs to another.
The study found that, at rest, the men and women breathed out about 500 particles per minute.
But when they exercised, that total soared 132-fold, topping out above 76,000 particles per minute, on average, during the most strenuous exertion.
Most people who contract COVID recover within a few weeks.
But for some people, symptoms can develop later, or persist for a long time after the initial infection.
A recent review of the evidence on long COVID suggests the condition affects at least 65 million people around the world, occurring after at least 10% of COVID infections, and affecting all age groups.
Common long COVID symptoms include fatigue, shortness of breath, and difficulties with memory and concentration (“brain fog”).
Symptoms can worsen with physical or mental exertion.
We’re still learning about long COVID, and treatment options are very limited.
Recently, some people, for example on social media, have been talking about a variety of diets as ways to manage long COVID symptoms.
But what are these diets, and what does the evidence say?
This article is part of Quarter Life, a series about issues affecting those of us in our twenties and thirties.
From the challenges of beginning a career and taking care of our mental health, to the excitement of starting a family, adopting a pet or just making friends as an adult.
The articles in this series explore the questions and bring answers as we navigate this turbulent period of life.
You may be interested in:
What’s it like being a young person with long COVID?
You might feel like a failure (but you’re not)
Binge-eating disorder is more common than many realise, yet it’s rarely discussed – here’s what you need to know
Smartwatches could help detect and track COVID – here’s what the research shows
The anti-inflammatory diet
The process by which the immune system protects us from harmful pathogens is called inflammation.
But too much inflammation can be a bad thing.
Scientists believe that many of the symptoms associated with long COVID arise from chronic inflammation.
We know that some foods can promote inflammation, while studies have shown that components of certain foods may have anti-inflammatory effects.
So an anti-inflammatory diet involves avoiding foods that elicit inflammation, such as fried foods, refined carbohydrates, sugar, red and processed meats, and lard.
Instead it focuses on foods that reduce inflammation, such as tomatoes, olive oil, green leafy vegetables, nuts, fatty fish and fruits such as strawberries and blueberries.
These foods are high in antioxidants and compounds which help protect against inflammation.
If you’re looking for a diet that closely follows the tenets of anti-inflammatory eating, consider the Mediterranean diet.
Following a Mediterranean diet means eating lots of fruit, vegetables, nuts, whole grains, fish and healthy oils.
This diet is rich in vitamins, minerals and dietary fibre, and has an anti-inflammatory effect in the gut.
Researchers have suggested the Mediterranean diet may have benefits in reducing the severity of a COVID infection in the short term, as well as in addressing longer-term symptoms.
The low histamine diet
Histamine is a compound released by cells, often in response to an injury or an allergic reaction.
If we have hay fever or are stung by a bee, we might take an antihistamine.
Histamine can lead to inflammation and can be a problem when we can’t break it down properly, and levels get too high.
Symptoms when this happens can include headaches, diarrhoea, wheezing and fatigue.
Many of these symptoms are similar to those reported with long COVID.
Some scientists have proposed that the increased inflammatory responses seen with long COVID could be caused by increased histamine release by dysfunctional immune cells, which we’ve seen before with other conditions.
A low histamine diet involves restricting the intake of food and drinks considered high in histamine for several weeks, before gradually reintroducing them to test tolerance.
These include alcohol, fermented foods, dairy products, shellfish, processed meats and aged cheese, as well as wheat germ and a range of fruit and vegetables.
However, there appears to be lack of consensus on which foods are truly high in histamine.
And as the foods are wide ranging, this can be a tricky diet to implement without potentially causing nutritional deficiencies.
Although some people have reported an improvement in their symptoms by following a low histamine diet, there have been no studies published in this area.
Given the lack of evidence and the associated challenges, elimination of dietary histamine is not currently recommended for long COVID.
The plant-based diet
Plant-based eating refers to diets where the majority of energy is derived from plant foods, such as vegan and vegetarian diets.
Plant-based diets are beneficial to markers of inflammation and may favourably alter immune function.
More specifically, a well-balanced plant-based diet is high in fibre, antioxidants, good fatty acids and a range of vitamins and minerals, which positively affect several types of cells implicated in immune function and may exhibit direct antiviral properties.
For example, compounds called polyphenols found in fruits and vegetables may improve the functionality and activity of natural killer cells, an immune cell that patrols the body recognising abnormal cells.
Though some long COVID sufferers have touted the benefits of a plant-based diet, its usefulness to alleviate long COVID symptoms has not yet been examined in clinical trials.
Nevertheless, evidence from studies done before the pandemic suggests a plant-based diet may benefit some conditions that can also affect people with long COVID – including fatigue, headaches, anxiety, depression and muscle pain.
Read more: COVID and your gut: how a healthy microbiome can reduce the severity of infection – and vice versa
Take-home message
Some diets, such as a low histamine diet, are not currently backed up by enough data when it comes to the management of long COVID.
But a varied Mediterranean diet or well managed plant-based diet can provide certain nutrients which have positive effects on immune function and may protect against chronic inflammation.
That said, more research is still needed as to how these diets may affect long COVID.
If you’re considering changing your diet to manage long COVID symptoms, it’s best to consult your GP first to ensure you can do so safely.
The study indicates that pharmaceutical and public health interventions remain important to protect children and young people against COVID-19.
Image credit: Shutterstock.
The researchers investigated this using data from US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention databases for the period 1 August 2021 to 31 July 2022.
Key findings:
Among children and young people aged 0 – 19 years in the US, COVID-19 ranked eighth among all causes of death; fifth among all disease-related causes of death; and first in deaths caused by infectious or respiratory diseases.
By age group, COVID-19 ranked seventh (infants), seventh (1–4 year olds), sixth (5–9 year olds), sixth (10–14 year olds), and fifth (15–19 year olds).
COVID-19 was the underlying cause for 2% of deaths in children and young people (800 out of 43,000), with an overall death rate of 1.0 per 100,000 of the population aged 0–19.
The leading cause of death (perinatal conditions) had an overall death rate of 12.7 per 100,000; COVID-19 ranked ahead of influenza and pneumonia, which together had a death rate of 0.6 per 100,000.
Like many diseases, COVID-19 death rates followed a U-shaped pattern across this age-range.
COVID-19 death rates were highest in infants aged less than one year (4.3 per 100,000), second highest in those aged 15–19 years (1.8 per 100,000), and lowest in children aged 5 –9 years (0.4 per 100,000).
Overall, deaths in children and young people were higher during the Delta and Omicron waves compared to previous waves (pre-July 2021), likely reflecting the higher numbers infected during these periods.
Nevertheless, in the pre-Delta period of the pandemic, COVID-19 still ranked as the ninth leading cause of death overall.
The month with the highest number of COVID-19 related deaths in 0 - 19 year-olds was January 2022 at 160.
Many of the 82 million American children and young people were infected during the big Delta and Omicron waves, and as a result more than 1,300 children and young people have died from COVID-19 during the pandemic, most in the last two years.
Associate Professor Seth Flaxman, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford.
Although COVID-19 amplifies the impacts of other diseases (such as pneumonia and influenza), this study focuses on deaths that were directly caused by COVID-19, rather than those where COVID-19 was a contributing cause.
Therefore, it is likely that these results understate the true burden of COVID-19 related deaths in this age-group.
Compared with other age-groups, the overall risk of death from COVID-19 was substantially lower in children and young people.
For instance, between 1 August 2021 and 31 July 2022, the COVID-19 death rate among all ages in the US was 109 per 100,000.
However, because deaths among children and young people in the US are rare, the mortality burden of COVID-19 is best understood in the context of all other causes of death in this age-group.
According to the researchers, these results suggest that, with variants of COVID-19 continuing to circulate, public health measures such as vaccinations, staying at home when sick, and ventilation still have an important role to play in limiting transmission of the virus and mitigating severe disease in children and young people.
Associate Professor Seth Flaxman (Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford), lead author of the study, said: ‘These results demonstrate that while it's rare for kids and teens to die in the US, COVID-19 is now the leading underlying cause of death from infectious disease for this age group.
Fortunately, we now have an array of effective tools to minimize risk, from building ventilation to air purifiers to safe vaccines.
Working together, communities can significantly limit the extent of infection and severe disease.’
Monthly number of deaths in the US of children and young people (aged 0-19), where COVID-19 was listed as the cause of death on the death certificate.
Image credit: Flaxman et al. JAMA Network Open.
The study also involved researchers from Imperial College London, Queen Mary University of London, Columbia University, the National University of Singapore and the University of Copenhagen.
The full paper ‘Assessment of COVID-19 as the underlying cause of death among children and young people aged 0 to 19 years in the US’ can be read in the journal JAMA Network Open.
The COVID-19 pandemic has wreaked havoc on mental health, and its consequences linger.
One large research review found that the pandemic increased the prevalence of depression by almost 28%.
But so far, research have focused on richer countries, while the adverse mental-health response to COVID-19 outbreaks and lockdowns in low- and middle-income countries have garnered far less attention in academic research and policy discussions.
There’s reason to suspect that the blow delivered by the pandemic to individuals’ mental health could be worse in poorer countries, says Yale SOM’s Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak.
Mobarak’s own research has shown that the pandemic hit the economies of low- and middle-income countries hardest, often leading to widespread food shortages.
These countries also have worse access to healthcare and less insurance coverage—and many of them received fewer COVID-19 vaccines.
“Mental health problems are big, and during the pandemic, they got bigger.
And we really don’t have the infrastructure or the resources to deal with this.
It will require some creative solutions.”
For a new study, published this month in PLOS Medicine, Mobarak collaborated with Nursena Aksünger, a PhD candidate at Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam; Corey Vernot, a research associate at Yale; and an international team of researchers to investigate how the pandemic affected the incidence of depression in eight low- and middle-income countries in South Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and South America.
The research team conducted repeated surveys of over 20,000 people, spanning a period from before the pandemic to 15 months after its onset.
The researchers’ findings were sobering: not only did they reveal a “large, significant, negative impact of the pandemic on mental health,” but those impacts also appeared to persist beyond their severest point in the early months of lockdown.
“We do not see a clear sign of mental health fully bouncing back to pre-pandemic levels,” they write.
Mobarak hopes the paper’s striking findings will act as a wake-up call to policymakers and others with the power to implement public mental health interventions.
“We are noticing that these [mental health] problems are big, and during the pandemic, they got bigger,” Mobarak says.
“And we really don't have the infrastructure or the resources to deal with this.
It will require some creative solutions.”
The new paper grew from a research project Mobarak began before the pandemic, and on a very different research question: whether the provision of loans could help to address seasonal food insecurity in Nepal.
When the pandemic hit, Mobarak’s research team continued regularly interviewing their subjects in Nepal over the phone.
At the same time, they launched a series of survey-based projects in other countries that sought to quantify the scope of pandemic-related economic losses.
“We wanted to try to look at different ways in which this pandemic might have persistent effects on people’s lives that we’ll have to worry about in the future,” Mobarak says.
“Mental health was one such area.”
Mobarak set out to find other researchers conducting the kind of survey-based data collection that could help broaden the foundation of his own project, expanding its scope and geographic reach.
To fit into his study, other researchers’ data needed to have specific characteristics—for example, they had include a pre-pandemic survey period and repeated rounds of interviews of the same subjects.
In the end, the paper’s data consists of ten different sample groups, totaling 21,162 individuals, across Bangladesh, Colombia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Nepal, Nigeria, Rwanda, and Sierra Leone.
Taking multiple rounds of sample group surveys proved crucial, because they revealed predictable, within-year fluctuations in mental health driven by crop cycles.
The researchers noticed that mental health tends to suffer in the pre-harvest “lean” period, and improve after a harvest.
Methodologically, this was an important discovery because it signaled to the researchers that they needed to control for these seasonal variations to reveal the true impact of the pandemic on mental health.
“Those fluctuations can dwarf pandemic effects and risk conflating seasonality with the pandemic,” the authors write, “depending on the exact phase of the local crop cycle during which COVID-19 had arrived in a country.”
Even after controlling for cropping-related ups and downs, the researchers found that depression symptoms increased by around 0.3 standard deviations in the four months following the onset of the pandemic—a significant amount.
Looking for more insights?
Sign up to get our top stories by email.
Email Thanks for signing up
Especially concerning to the researchers is the fact that in the countries they studied, the infrastructure necessary to offer sorely needed mental health treatment is lacking.
The World Health Organization reports that 82% of people living with a mental health disorder live in low- or middle-income countries, where annual mental health spending constitutes only $0.25 per person (compared with an average of just under $2 per person globally).
The solution, Aksünger says, is to develop models for affordable mental health treatment.
“To address the lack of mental health infrastructure in LMICs, policymakers should prioritize task-sharing and invest in frugal solutions such as training lay health workers and community-based care providers”—a concept similar to community health workers who offer immunization or neonatal health services.
“By including this support in universal healthcare coverage, the accessibility and affordability of mental health services can be improved, making a significant difference in the lives of those who need it most.”
Mobarak’s research projects often aim to study the effectiveness of possible solutions to big problems, and that’s where he hopes to pivot next.
The Yale Research Initiative on Innovation and Scale (Y-RISE), where Mobarak serves as faculty director, has teamed up with non-governmental development organization BRAC in Bangladesh to test the effectiveness of community-based lay mental health workers.
“We have to be thinking creatively about those types of solutions,” Mobarak says, “because the problem's there, and currently there's very little attention paid to it.”
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study assessing how the research community views COVID-19 in terms of its origin and spread, ways to avoid it, and expectations for post-COVID-19.
We detected the range viewpoints about COVID-19 and how these aligned with researcher backgrounds and demographics.
Area of consensus
The strongest consensus was agreement with prompts related to coping with COVID-19 through (a) increasing economic support (S9), (b) improving health care facilities (S7), (c) strengthening public health systems (S15), and (d) adhering to scientific advice (S8).
The highest consensus in agreement with prompt S9 is understandable since COVID-19 pandemic-related constraints caused enormous declines in global economies that disproportionately impacted developing countries (Ibn-Mohammed et al., 2021; Loayza, 2020), particularly affecting working-class people (Davies, 2020; Josephson et al., 2021).
Most governments implemented economic support policies later than lockdowns and health policies (Hale et al., 2021), failing to provide timely support for needy populations (Loayza, 2020).
Because of limited resources and capabilities (e.g., economic resources, poor public health infrastructure), developing countries had few options (Loayza, 2020; Maffioli, 2020; McKibbin and Fernando, 2021), which may have prompted survey respondents from developing countries to agree with statements that global economic system, globalization, and social and economic inequalities are issues now and in the post-COVID era (Kanitkar, 2020; Maffioli, 2020).
The comprehensive support for the health care system and science-based policies are likely influenced by two factors.
First, high death rates during COVID-19 peaks has been attributed to collapse of the public health system in many countries (Faggioni et al., 2021; Ferrante et al., 2020).
Some nations (e.g., Taiwan, New Zealand, Singapore) successfully responded to COVID-19 and brought it under-control, because these countries already had a good public health infrastructure and a dedicated national public health agency to implement science-based policies (Lee and Lee, 2020; Summers et al., 2020).
Second, failure to control a rapid spread and a surge of human death in the developed countries appear to be, to some extent, related to health inequities within those countries (Gaynor and Wilson, 2020; Shadmi et al., 2020), ignorance, and science denial by political leaders (Ren, 2020).
The prompt “Wildlife trade and consumption is the major cause of COVID-19 pandemic” received the least support from respondents, and other prompts related to ecological dimension were also not well supported.
Those who agreed with prompts concerning the ecological aspects of COVID-19 were mostly from high-income countries, university graduates, or both, consistent with previous studies showing that levels of concern about the environment are positively correlated with the economic status of countries (Franzen and Vogl, 2013; Gelissen, 2007) and levels of education (Aminrad et al., 2011).
Such an environmentally conscious attitude takes time to develop and depends on the quality of environmental education received (Bradley et al., 1999; Ramsey and Rickson, 1976).
The multinomial logistic regression analysis detected the impact of demographic factors on respondents’ perceptions on some response on prompts.
We found that males were more likely to agree than females with the prompt, “There will be some temporal changes, and everything will remain the same as pre-COVID-19” (S16).
This may be related to men’s tendency to perceive fewer negative impacts of environmental crises (e.g., climate change) (Poortinga et al., 2019), but it warrants further investigation.
Respondents from high income and middle-high income countries, those highly educated, experienced, and senior showed greater support for the prompt, “The consumption of wildlife should be banned to avoid such pandemics in the future” (S13).
Such support for banning wildlife consumption perhaps reflects a call for direct intervention that would reduce pathogen spillover from animals to people (Plowright et al., 2017), although broader actions such as limiting land-use change have been advocated to contain the emergence of zoonotic diseases (Plowright et al., 2021).
Respondents from low-and-middle-income countries showed strong support for the prompt, “There will be an increased value of scientific works, and environmental agendas will be at the center play of development policies”, which may be related to the severity of environmental problems (e.g., water pollution, sanitation) in these countries, aggravating the impacts of COVID-19 (Cruz et al., 2021; Josephson et al., 2021; Shamasunder et al., 2020; Stiegler and Bouchard, 2020; van Barneveld et al., 2020).
We did not find an association between any demographic variables and the prompt, “Improved health and hygiene facilities and services will be in place”, reflecting the widespread support for this prompt from all regions, academic levels, and age groups (Cruz et al., 2021; Loayza, 2020; Shadmi et al., 2020; Shamasunder et al., 2020).
The pandemic has affected almost all walks of life in society, but the severity of impacts was disproportionately high among minorities, poor, and disadvantaged communities (Gaynor and Wilson, 2020).
For our respondents, taken here as representative of the scientific research community, COVID-19 provided new opportunities or advantages (e.g., time spent with family) but also uncertainty.
For example, 61% of respondents agreed with the statement, “I have/had quality time with family”, and 56% with, “I am worried about the future uncertainties”.
The lockdown and/or self-imposed “work from home” gave an opportunity to be with family members for some time and helped increase closeness, reconnection, better communication, deeper personal relationships (Every-Palmer et al., 2020) and to appreciate surroundings, with more sighting of wildlife (Manenti et al., 2020; Rutz et al., 2020).
On the other hand, restricted movements and prolonged staying at home often have negative psychological effects (Brooks et al., 2020;
Chong et al., 2004; Grover et al., 2020; Rania and Coppola, 2021).
Diverse but not polarized views
We noted diverse viewpoints about how COVID-19 unfolded as a global crisis, why it spread on such a scale, and what post-pandemic transformations are required to cope with similar future crisis.
Our results, based on exploratory factor analysis, will contribute to ongoing efforts to understand and respond to COVID-19 (Kissinger, 2020; Leach et al., 2021; Wasserman et al., 2020).
We confirmed that viewpoints about COVID-19 broadly fall within three dimensions, each representing a unique domain of thinking about COVID-19.
The first dimension (strengthening public health) relates to improving health care facilities, strengthening public health systems, improving environmental quality, providing economic support, and integrating scientific advice to avoid and cope with the pandemic, consistent with fundamental elements of health equity perspectives (Shadmi et al., 2020).
COVID-19 has affected vulnerable populations disproportionately across the world and in countries with poor public health infrastructure (Blundell et al., 2020; Dang et al., 2020; Galea, 2020; Howard et al., 2017; Iles and Montenegro de Wit, 2020; Kirby, 2020; Shadmi et al., 2020).
A proactive public policy supported by scientific evidence is urgently needed to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic and similar global health crises.
In both developed and developing countries the COVID-19 crises was exacerbated by politics, with some leaders downplaying the science for political expediency (Gonsalves and Yamey, 2020).
For example, the early ignorance by authorities in countries like the United States and Italy resulted in the loss of an opportunity to contain COVID-19 (Haffajee and Mello, 2020; Goumenou et al., 2020).
The same occurred in India where the health crisis during the second wave was devastating, but preventable (Lancet, 2021).
The second dimension (science-led public policy) relates to post-COVID-19 expectations for science-informed public policies, promoting health equity, social justice, and environmental governance.
This dimension, like the first (strengthening public health), primarily concerns strategies to minimize and cope with the COVID-19 pandemic.
This dimension, however, also relates to future strategies in the post-COVID-19 world where respondents call for a paradigm shift ensuring scientific evidence to tackle health inequity to prevent or minimize such pandemics in future (Wang and Tang, 2020).
The third dimension relates to maintaining ecosystem functioning and enforcing strict wildlife trade regulation.
This dimension stems from the view that the destruction of natural ecosystems, land-use change, habitat fragmentation, and wildlife hunting and trade increases human–wildlife interfaces and the transmission of zoonotic agents (Keesing et al., 2006; Platto et al., 2021; Plowright et al., 2017; 2021; Reisen, 2010; Terraube and Fernández-Llamazares, 2020).
Advocates of this perspective often focus on maintaining ecosystem integrity, and integrating human health into global biodiversity conservation policies (Terraube and Fernández-Llamazares, 2020).
Thus, COVID-19 is an opportunity to reflect on the global stresses that humankind as imposed on ecosystems (Zabaniotou, 2020).
Conclusion and the way forward
Epidemics and pandemics remind us of humankinds enduring vulnerability to infectious disease.
Our study makes an important contribution to the global COVID-19 debate.
Our findings show there is agreement by research scholars around the world in the importance of science-based public policy promoting health equity, environmental governance and social justice.
Our results suggested an influence of age, level of education and geographies on agreement with statements concerning causes and remedies for pandemics like COVID-19.
Although these views are reflected in the three different dimensions, they are not divided, suggesting an opportunity for a broader agreement.
Some variability in responses to our survey may reflect the academic backgrounds, political ideologies and religious beliefs of respondents, which are beyond the purview of this study (Clark, 1984).
Nevertheless, the trends detected in our survey reflect global ‘collectivities’ because our respondents represent the most informed populations across societies globally.
Furthermore, such ‘collectivities’ are ubiquitous across world due to the rapid expansion of communication tools and human movements (Appadurai, 1996).
Our survey detected strong support for reducing health inequalities and strengthening economic developments, indicating an overarching call by the global research community for better economic justice and access to quality health services.
A small proportion of respondents also support ecological perspective (Mansuy, 2020; Roche et al., 2020).
Thus, finding a pathway for the better integration of economic and ecological policies provides a win-win situation for the future.
While there are already some calls and actions to achieve global sustainability goals (Barbier, 2012; Brondizio et al., 2019; Taylor et al., 2020; UNEP, 1992; United Nations, 2019; United Nations (UN), 1972), COVID-19 has instigated a heightened acknowledgment of green pathways (e.g., biodiversity conservation, green economy, green energy) for a post-pandemic world (Di Marco et al., 2020; Naidoo and Fisher, 2020).
The “One Health” approach that gained a foothold in the public health sector similarly links the emergence of zoonotic diseases to environmental degradation.
It is important to apply such a perspective in all policy domains (Dye, 2022).
However, a small difference in perspectives can impede such integration, requiring an explicit and open debate and involvement of research scholars all around the world for policy advocacy (Gonsalves and Yamey, 2020).
China, for example, imposed a ban on wildlife trade following the SARS pandemic in 2012, but relaxed it later (Karesh et al., 2012).
It is reasonable to expect that health related disasters facilitated by ongoing global climate change and modifications of natural environments to become more frequent and devastating in future (Bezerra-Santos et al., 2021; Plowright et al., 2021).
It is time to continue the conversation to integrate health equity and environmental conservation in public health policies throughout the world.
PROVIDENCE, R.I.
[Brown University] — Public health messages that promote COVID-19 vaccination rates at state, city and community levels may have less influence on vaccination decisions than the signals people receive from their own family and friends.
That’s according to a study published on the cover of the July 19 issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Therefore, the most promising public health interventions to promote COVID-19 vaccine uptake should seek ways to leverage social norms among close ties, the findings assert.
“One of the takeaways is the importance of people’s perceptions of the intentions of the people around them,” said Nathaniel Rabb, a project manager at the Policy Lab at Brown University and the lead author of the study.
“It lends further credence to the idea about changing disclosure norms.
It’s likely given other survey data we’ve seen that in groups where vaccination is less common, people read the norms and talk about it less, even if they are vaccinated.
It’s almost taboo.”
The research team posits there’s a feedback loop that needs to be disrupted, Rabb said.
“It will certainly need a very different public health policy approach than putting up a billboard with how many people in your state got vaccinated, or berating people into doing it or telling them they’re at terrible risk of peril,” Rabb said.
“It’s going to require a long-game strategy.
In our results, it seems like you have to break these taboos about talking about it — and that’s not trivial.”
The findings were based on surveys of Rhode Island respondents and the general U.S. population in 2020 during the first year of the pandemic, and again in March 2021 once vaccines were becoming available to segments of the general population.
The data were collected and analyzed in partnership with the Rhode Island Department of Health.
CNN —
The United States seems to have hit a Covid-19 plateau, with more than 40,000 people hospitalized and more than 400 deaths a day consistently over the past month or so.
It’s a dramatic improvement from this winter – there were four times as many hospitalizations and nearly six times as many deaths at the peak of the first Omicron wave – but still stubbornly high numbers.
And there are big question marks around what might happen next, as the coronavirus’ evolution remains quite elusive 2½ years into the pandemic.
“We’ve never really cracked that: why these surges go up and down, how long it stays up and how fast it comes down,” said Dr. Eric Topol, a cardiologist and professor of molecular medicine at Scripps Research.
“All these things are still somewhat of a mystery.”
BA.5 remains the dominant subvariant in the US for now, causing most new cases as it has since the last week of June.
Data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, published Tuesday, shows that the Omicron offshoot accounted for 87% of new cases in the first week of August, inching up a few percentage points from the week before.
That slight increase in prevalence is a sign that no other variants are outcompeting it – and promising for future trends.
BA.5 “has been very formidable because it’s so transmissible and has so much immune evasion,” Topol said.
But the plateau in hospitalizations is “encouraging” because it means the subvariant probably has worked its way through most of the hosts it can find.
“Right now, the question is what comes as we descend from BA.5.
It could take weeks.”
CDC ensemble forecasts predict stable trends in hospitalizations and deaths over the coming weeks, and experts agree that the worst of the wave has probably passed.
But it’s hummed along at a high level because it continues to find people whose immunity from vaccination or infection has waned over time – something that will continue to happen, said William Hanage, an epidemiologist and associate professor at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.
And with children going back to school, a change in seasons and other variants on the horizon, it’s unclear when the plateau will drop – and by how much.
“I would expect things to decline at least for the next month or so,” said Trevor Bedford, an epidemiologist and genomic scientist at the University of Washington’s School of Public Health.
“But, of course, there are other things waiting in the wings.
If it’s not variant-driven, it will be seasonality-driven,” he said, with case rates likely to rise as more people head indoors for colder weather.
Even if trends don’t improve as expected, though, it’s unlikely that potential future waves will be as devastating as with Delta or the original Omicron variant.
Alpha, Delta and Omicron “are cousins, not children,” Hanage said.
They each made a significant impact on the population because they were so different from each other.
But the turnover that’s happened this year – from BA.2 to BA.2.12.1 to BA.5 – has all “emerged from within Omicron,” and the subvariants are much more similar to each other.
If the next variant is as different as the change from Delta to Omicron, it would be “quite a change” from what’s been happening recently, he said.
That’s not impossible, and close attention is being paid to the latest subvariants that have popped up.
Over the past week, BA.4.6 grew from about 4% of cases in the US to just under 5%, according to CDC data.
Its mutations aren’t “especially worrisome” when it comes to immune evasion, Topol said, but we just don’t know yet.
Even a small increase in prevalence is growth, and “if it keeps growing, that means it’s got an advantage.
The more it grows, the more we’ll have to be concerned about it.”
Another Omicron offshoot, BA.2.75, has not made it to the CDC’s variant tracker.
It accounts for less than 1% of cases in the US, according to gene sequencing company Helix.
But people are watching “with a degree of trepidation” because it has more changes on the spike gene that could lead to more substantial immune escape or transmissibility, Hanage said.
Still, so much is unknown.
Combinations of changes like this have sometimes led to the next variant of concern, and other times they’ve gone nowhere, he said.
Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.
Looking ahead, Hanage says, “there’s likely to be one step forward, two steps back” when it comes to progress in the Covid-19 pandemic.
And if deaths stay above 400 a day for a full year, that’s more than twice as bad as the worst recent flu seasons, he said.
“So those are numbers we’ve got at the moment, at a point when things are, relatively speaking, good,” he said.
“This is something which I think a lot of people don’t grasp.”
Good governance, perceived as the set of processes and tools through which steps towards recovery and development can be generated, should be accompanied by responsibility, transparency, uprightness and leadership.
All of this falls, in particular, on the institutions and decision-making actors.
Therefore, the identification of vulnerabilities and the analysis of governments’ ability to reduce the harmful effects of crises should be priorities on a large scale.
In general, health systems around the world are affected differently by governance, this modeling the long-term development outcomes in this sector.
The findings highlighted that the governance indicators influence the COVID-19 vaccination process, the most significant for the analyzed period (quarters of 2021) being, in order of their importance: GE, RQ, CC, RL, V&A and PS.
Thus, in the current context, the quality of public health policies is primarly conditioned by the government effectiveness, which substantially transpose in the validity of the responses offered to the COVID-19 crisis.
Government effectiveness remains critical to responding to the COVID-19 pandemic and immunizing the population (the scores obtained have a strong and positive impact on vaccination rates).
The efficiency of the government is paramount in taking other measures with major influence on the evolution of the pandemic, such as the coordinated logistical planning for vaccination, which can include COVID-19 testing, ongoing monitoring of personal protective equipment, adequate medical supplies, good organization for the distribution of vaccines, even in difficult geographical areas (e.g., those affected by war or instability), effective management and treatment of patients with COVID-19.
Although different factors may contribute to counteracting the diffusion of COVID-19, good governance has a special role to play because it means implementing those public strategies and policies that minimize the negative repercussions of the pandemic [67].
Institutions can shape how things can be done in society.
For this reason, if there is effective cooperation and coordination between the stakeholders involved (governments, local authorities, public health directorates, private sector, medical research entities, hospitals, international institutions), the public’s confidence in accepting and respecting the rule of law will be higher.
As noted, there is a tendency for higher levels of acceptance of vaccination where governance also has greater values, and this is precisely due to trust in institutions and the existence of social dialogue based on truthful and complete information, to make citizens aware of both the benefits and possible side effects of vaccines.
During crises, the good governance is more relevant than ever, and, in the COVID-19 context, it mainly means to inform the population about the possible risks that may arise: overcrowding of hospitals, increasing the likelihood of potentially more severe mutations that do not respond to existing vaccines, pressure on medical staff, depletion of resources to support health systems [35].
The governments should have the capacity to support the efforts and achievements of scientists, to communicate effectively with citizens to ensure vaccination campaigns with optimal results, thus eliminating misinformation.
While young people are more resistant to this virus, especially if comorbidities are ruled out, for older people, who often have certain medical conditions, it is more than necessary to become acquianted with the benefits of immunization by vaccination.
However, the results of the COVID-19 vaccination process were different for each category of countries analyzed (high, middle and low-income).
In low-income countries, where access to immunization facilities is quite difficult due to many marginalized groups, the adequate distribution of vaccines has been a challenge.
Also, for these category of countries, in particular, the lack or precariousness of the necessary means for the transport and storage of vaccines should be mentioned, considering that they should be kept at very low temperatures.
In certain low and middle-income countries (India, Brazil, Indonesia, South Africa), the production of COVID-19 vaccines was carried out [68], but many of them do not have the internal capacity to manufacture vaccines and thus rely on high-income countries or multinational companies.
Moreover, they show pronounced income inequalities, deficiencies in resources, government effectiveness and regulatory quality such as policies, planning, programmes, medical personnel, organized laboratories, industries, research & development, and government funding.
Even if these countries were granted adequate funding and access to vaccine patents, in the absence of strong government effectiveness, the problems of vaccine production and timely immunization of the population could not be properly resolved, countries thus facing significant delays in vaccine access, despite initiatives aimed at ensuring equitable distribution, such as COVID-19 Vaccines Global Access (COVAX) [69].
In the case of low and middle-income countries, the WHO tried to establish a COVAX intra-aid tool, to access doses of vaccines, external financing being necessary for purchases or donations
[52, 70].
An issue of major differentiation in regulatory quality regarding COVID-19 vaccines was the authorization of vaccines: while the high-income countries quickly authorized them, the low and middle ones did not emit the necessary licenses for their delivery and widespread use in a timely manner [71].
Another governance problem arising in the population vaccination process in some low and middle-income countries is the poor inclusion of people most exposed to the COVID-19 (population with comorbidities and those aged over 65) in the vaccination campaigns.
For this reason, governments should demonstrate transparency and good regulatory quality when they take measures and should, furthermore, rely on scientific evidence when explaining the priority vaccination of certain population categories and thus build confidence in COVID-19 vaccines [68, 72].
If we were to compare the three groups of countries studied, it turns out that for those in the low-income category, the control of corruption matters the most in the COVID-19 vaccination process, and for both middle and high-income countries, the most relevant governance indicator is represented by the regulatory quality.
These findings can be explained by the fact that, on the one hand, countries with lower incomes cannot afford to generalize effective mechanisms for identifying and sanctioning corruption, which slows down the vaccination process, and, on the other hand, middle- and high-income countries make efforts to adapt their legislation to fluctuating contexts, emphasizing the need for the existence of quality regulations so that they reach the best results.
Knowing the European specifics better and judging by the experience gained over the years, the citizens of countries that have gone through an oppressive regime (in the East) may prove, in some cases, to no longer readily accept directives to change behaviour.
But, at the same time, being already used to restrictions, they can master them faster compared to the population in western societies.
It should also be emphasized that the governance indicator with the lowest values in association with the COVID-19 vaccination process is voice & accountability, both in the case of low and of high-income countries, which shows that citizens, in general, could not be involved too much in the decision-making process, as it is an issue of public health that should rather be adapted to international norms and directives.
Debates surrounding the COVID-19 vaccination have included, quite often, issues related to distribution, equity and respect for social rights [73].
However, there are significant gaps between states in terms of these aspects, which reinforces the need for organizations or governments to act on rationales connected to solidarity, especially when it comes to a global public health problem, which should not differentiate between people.
Even if there is a pronounced distance regarding the COVID-19 vaccination between high-income countries of the world and those with internal deficiencies, international institutions should support the latter so that everyone could benefit from the fundamental right to have access to health services.
In order to know where an urgent intervention is required, states should have effective reporting systems that allow the recording of statistical data on a regular basis.
There are isolated communities and countries without close international ties, and in the absence of homogeneous data, it is very difficult to quantify the plurality of facets of the COVID-19 vaccination process (for instance, the distribution of COVID-19 vaccines by age groups, gender, population category, medical conditions, prevention behaviors, race, or place of origin).
Therefore, a more extensive analysis, starting from these criteria, could not be realized, because there are no such integrated data worldwide, at least as far as we know, to cover the chosen sample (170 states).
There are, however, certain statistics addressing the specifics of some communities, countries or regional groups, related to COVID-19: e.g., the US Department of Health and Human Services, through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), provides the population and the authorities with weekly updated statistics in relation to COVID-19 vaccination equity (for racial and ethnic minority groups), but only for the US [74].
The lack of a reliable ongoing data collection system, based on reports guided by the same criteria, causes discontinuities in the time series and makes it intricate to cover wider territorial issues in connection with COVID-19 vaccination
[75].
To have an aggregate reporting system, several measurement criteria should have been set at the international level and applied for all the countries of the world.
Moreover, in order to act promptly on the basis of the alert systems and to account for the progress in terms of vaccination, these reports should be made at least weekly, divided mainly by categories of groups, age, race and ethnicity, as it is suggested by ‘Prevent Epidemics’
[76].
Without such statistics and without considering a unitary and transparent evaluation system, it is impossible to precisely quantify (in)equity in the distribution of COVID-19 vaccines.
The obstacles that intervene in the collection of uniform data by country, which would allow comparisons to be made, are mainly related to the legislative aspects, to the digital infrastructure of the states, to what is understood by some indicators (for example, [76] signaled that “doses received” means, on the one hand, the COVID-19 doses distributed to the US jurisdictions, and, on the other hand, the COVID-19 doses administered (partially vs. fully), which leads to inconsistent reporting).
Moreover, the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) supported the initiative regarding global access to COVID-19 vaccines, offered technical assistance for their delivery and proposed a compendium with a series of indicators related to vaccination (e.g., the number of guides, plans and strategies; number of people trained; number of countries with vaccine tracking systems; the number of people reached by USAID messages regarding COVID-19 vaccinations through various information channels, etc.), but all of them are addressed to the US [77].
Therefore, guiding the distribution of COVID-19 vaccines based on public statistical data should be of particular interest for governments, all the more so as there were countries that purchased a much larger number of vaccine doses (Australia, Canada, Great Britain) and later, they had to redistribute or donate them to other countries in need [78]; there were also situations where vials were wasted for various reasons [79, 80].
Several studies clearly emphasize that the access to COVID-19 vaccines is facilitated by favorable socio-economic conditions [81], and the priority target group in obtaining them should be the population at major risks [82, 83].
Thus, low-income countries should be generously supported to reach a significant immunization threshold and to have an equitable vaccination so that marginalized groups are not extremely affected [84, 85].
Although the coverage of COVID-19 vaccination is quite heterogeneous globally, equitable access to vaccines for low- and middle-income states has been shown to be shaped by global mechanisms, prices, know-how, and the ability to carry out strong vaccination programs [86].
In addition, in order to reduce the disproportionate access to vaccines, [87] advocate for a Universal Vaccine Access Strategy, through which shortages in vulnerable countries can be adjusted, including by donating unused vials in countries that have purchased vaccines in excess of their needs.
Then, the WHO, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the Vaccine Alliance (GAVI) set up the COVID-19 Vaccine Delivery Partnership (CoVDP), in January 2022, to support low-income countries in the vaccination process, and through this initiative, 34 countries, especially in Africa, which recorded, in January 2022, vaccination rates lower than 10%, were helped to have access to the COVID-19 vaccine [88].
Through this laudable initiative, vaccination noticeably improved: e.g., Ethiopia reached a vaccination rate of over 33% in July 2022, while in January 2022 it had a rate of only 3%; then, more than 8 countries out of the 34 backed up by CoVDP exceeded 20% COVID-19 vaccination rates [89].
Then, we should also mention UNICEF’s efforts to establish the Access to Covid Tools Accelerator Supplies Financing Facility (ACT-A SFF) to help the poorest countries in the procurement of vaccines [90, 91].
Therefore, if in the case of high-income countries, which have more solid health systems, more technologically advanced medical infrastructure, COVID-19 tracking tools, it is easier to collect statistical data, in the case of low-income countries, given the problems they faced, it is demanding for them to have a broad coverage regarding the delivery of COVID-19 vaccines and precisely for this reason international support is crucial [92].
Even if in the year 2022 a slight improvement was made regarding COVID-19 vaccination, compared to the year 2021, within low-income groups (Additional file 1: Appendix 2) [93], actions to reduce imbalances between states should continue, primarily pursuing the right to health of each individual.
Anyway, the application of extensive studies that highlight the various drivers of COVID-19 vaccination could better shape immunization policies in low-income countries; e.g., [94] conducted a research on several countries, including some in this category, such as Burkina Faso, Mozambique, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Uganda, and they found that in Burkina Faso there is the lowest acceptance rate when it comes to the COVID-19 vaccine (66.5%); therefore, it is necessary to take specific measures in the direction of identified weaknesses.
In our analysis, only a small part of the broad palette of elements that can explain the dynamics of the COVID-19 vaccination process were captured.
Therefore, there are certain limits of the research related to the fact that other indicators could have been taken into account, such as: the endowment of countries with special equipment for transporting and storing vaccines, the number of vaccination campaigns, international financial support, the level of education, all these being crucial, especially in the case of low and middle-income countries.
Moreover, considering that the variables that define good governance (WGI of the World Bank) are expressed in perception data, it would have been interesting to apply opinion polls both among the population and health risk experts, to homogenize measurement units and to prevent possible biases between indicators.
However, it would be almost impossible to cover a very large sample through surveys, which would distinguish the particularities of each country.
This can be achieved, instead, in extended research teams and with governmental support.
Early data show that as of August 8, 2022, rates of self-reported long COVID are one quarter to one third higher among adults who are female, transgender, Hispanic, and without a high-school degree than they are among all adults (Figure 1).
In this policy watch, we explore how those higher rates of long COVID could exacerbate existing disparities in health and employment using new data on long COVID from the Household Pulse Survey, as reported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
The Pulse survey is an experimental survey providing information about how the COVID pandemic is affecting households from social and economic perspectives.
Its primary advantage is the short turn-around time, but the data may not meet all Census Bureau quality standards.
In June 2022, the survey began asking questions about long COVID.
While these early data provide some important insights into the prevalence of long COVID, to date, the sample only includes about 150,000 respondents, which limits the reliability of the findings and the ability to detect differences between groups.
This policy watch focuses on characteristics for which the CDC has determined there are enough observations to report differences between groups.
There is no well-established definition of long COVID, but the Pulse survey asked respondents whether they had any COVID symptoms that lasted for longer than 3 months, including “tiredness or fatigue, difficulty thinking, concentrating, forgetfulness, or memory problems (sometimes referred to as “brain fog”), difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, joint or muscle pain, fast-beating or pounding heart (also known as heart palpitations), chest pain, dizziness on standing, menstrual changes, changes to taste/smell, or inability to exercise.”
There are few other studies that evaluate the socioeconomic implications of long COVD, but those that do are consistent with our findings from the Pulse survey.
The Household Pulse data show that rates of long COVID are higher for adults who are female (18%) and transgender (19%) relative to males (11%).
The difference in rates between men and women has been documented elsewhere: Another study estimated the prevalence of long COVID pre-Omicron was 1.4%-2.2% of adult females in the U.S. compared with only 0.9%-1.7% of adult males.
It is unclear what is driving the differences in outcomes between women and men, but patterns are similar to that of other post-infection syndromes such as chronic fatigue syndrome.
These data may be the first published data showing separate rates of long COVID among people who are transgender, and the large confidence interval around the rate suggests considerable uncertainty in the estimate.
However, other research shows that transgender people have lower earnings and poorer health outcomes, which could contribute to greater vulnerability to COVID.
One in five (20%)
Hispanic adults reported ever having long COVID compared with less than 15% of White, Black, or Asian adults.
Data were not separately reported for American Indian and Alaska Native or Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander people.
There are not studies evaluating the causes of higher long COVID rates among Hispanic adults, but their higher rates of COVID infection undoubtedly contribute to the difference.
No differences are observed in rates of long COVID between Black and White adults, despite Black adults experiencing higher age-adjusted rates of COVID infection and death.
More research is needed to better understand the racial and ethnic patterns of long COVID rates and their relationship to COVID cases and deaths.
Of adults with less than a high-school diploma, 20% report having long COVID, compared with only 12% of adults with a college degree.
The Pulse data as reported by the CDC do not show the distribution of long COVID among people based on income or employment outcomes, but there is a well-established relationship between higher levels of education and lower earnings and income, so it is likely that rates of long COVID are higher among people with lower earnings and incomes.
It is unclear to what extent higher rates of long COVID result from reduced access to health care prior to infection, but a study of long COVID rates in the United Kingdom found socioeconomic deprivation was a risk factor.
Analyses of future Pulse data, with larger sample sizes, will be useful in determining whether similar patterns exist in the U.S.
Because long COVID disproportionately affects people of working age, it may exacerbate employment outcomes, in addition to health.
Consistent with other studies, the Pulse data show that rates of long COVID are highest among adults in their working years.
(It is likely that the very low rates of long COVID among people over age 60 reflect higher mortality from COVID among this population.)
Current research shows that long COVID significantly affects people’s ability to work.
Although it is too early to know how long-term those effects may be, a recent study found that people who experienced week-long, COVID-related absences from work were significantly less likely to be working than similar workers who did not miss a week of work for health-related reasons.
And a recent analysis of survey data found that 26% of people with long COVID reported that it had affected their employment.
Looking ahead, long COVID could amplify existing disparities within society.
Even before the pandemic, females were more likely to work in low-wage jobs or receive lower pay for similar levels of work as males, and the pandemic had particularly harmful effects on female’s employment relative to male’s.
Similarly, higher rates of long COVID among Hispanic adults may further exacerbate health, employment, and income disparities among this group, who were already harder hit by the pandemic.
Another study found that Latino and Black adults had higher rates of workplace exposure, which contributed to higher COVID prevalence—and eventually long COVID.
The Pulse data suggest that the effects of long COVID—like the effects of the pandemic more broadly—may fall disproportionately among adults who already experience disparities in health and employment outcomes.
Currently, the sample size is too small to analyze differences among some populations.
Future KFF analysis will leverage additional waves of Pulse survey data to further explore differences among groups that vary by race, ethnicity, income, employment, and other pertinent characteristics.
In releasing two new reports relevant to those with long COVID, HHS Secretary Becerra writes, “Long COVID can hinder an individual’s ability to work, attend school, participate in community life, and engage in everyday activities.”
Existing research reinforces the urgency of understanding the effects of long COVID on people: A recent study shows that 4 million people may be out-of-work in the U.S. as a result of long COVID.
The implications are magnified when one considers that the employment losses are concentrated among people who already have lower incomes, lower earnings, and additional challenges in accessing health care.
Further, long COVID patients are struggling to access disability benefits, which could mitigate some of the financial consequences associated with an inability to work As new research comes out on long COVID, it will be important to improve our understanding of who is most likely to be affected, what types of treatment are most promising, and what social and economic supports may mitigate the longer-term consequences of long COVID on socioeconomic disparities in the U.S.
SEPT. 15, 2022 – Between 2019 and 2021, the number of people primarily working from home tripled from 5.7% (roughly 9 million people) to 17.9% (27.6 million people), according to new 2021 American Community Survey (ACS) 1-year estimates released today by the U.S. Census Bureau.
Nearly half (48.3%) of workers in the District of Columbia worked from home, the highest percentage of home-based workers among states and state equivalents in 2021.
In addition to the District of Columbia, states with the highest percentage of home-based workers were Washington (24.2%), Maryland (24.0%), Colorado (23.7%) and Massachusetts (23.7%).
(These four states were not statistically different from each other.)
2021 marked the highest number and percentage of people working from home recorded since the ACS began in 2005.
“Work and commuting are central to American life, so the widespread adoption of working from home is a defining feature of the COVID-19 pandemic,” said Michael Burrows, statistician in the Census Bureau’s Journey-to-Work and Migration Statistics Branch.
“With the number of people who primarily work from home tripling over just a two-year period, the pandemic has very strongly impacted the commuting landscape in the United States.”
With more people working from home and fewer commuting by private vehicle, the average one-way travel time to work dropped to 25.6 minutes in 2021, among the shortest times in the last decade.
The average commute was two minutes shorter than the average of 27.6 minutes in 2019.
The ACS provides a wide range of important statistics about the nation’s people and housing, such as language spoken at home, education, commuting, employment, mortgage status and rent, income, poverty, and health insurance coverage.
It is the only source of local estimates for most of the 40-plus topics it covers.
Below is a sample of available statistics.
Your browser does not support the audio element.
U.S. infectious disease experts fear a winter surge of respiratory illness, like the one that overloaded E.R.s with COVID patients in January 2021, could yet materialize this winter, with several circulating viruses wreaking havoc.
So far, though, it looks like early peaks of RSV and flu are receding.
Mario Tama / Getty Images
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
As the new year begins and the depths of winter approach, U.S. infectious disease experts monitoring the “tripledemic” stew of viruses that have been plaguing the country say there’s good news — and bad.
The good news is the worst appears to be over from the RSV surge that has been making life miserable for many children and their parents.
RSV cases have been falling steadily since the end of November, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
At the same time, the flu — which also came roaring back this fall after mostly disappearing for the previous two years — looks like it's finally receding in most places, according to the latest data out Friday from the CDC.
"In a couple areas, we're seeing activity increase or plateau," Dr. Shikha Garg, a medical epidemiologist at the CDC, told NPR in an interview Friday.
"But in most areas, it's been declining.
"
The virus posing the biggest threat right now is — you guessed it — the one that causes COVID-19.
COVID “concerns us most” in the days and weeks ahead
"We're seeing sustained increases of COVID infections across the nation," Dr. Ashish Jha, the White House coronavirus response coordinator, told NPR in an interview.
"So COVID is the thing that concerns us most as we look at the days and weeks ahead.
"
The rate at which the coronavirus is being detected in wastewater, which has become a bellwether for the pandemic, has tripled or quadrupled in many parts of the U.S. in recent weeks, Jha says.
COVID-19 hospitalizations have jumped 70%, he says.
And 300 to 400 people are dying every day from COVID-19.
To make matters worse, all this is happening as yet another new, even more transmissible variant has taken over in the United States.
Called XBB.1.5, this new omicron subvariant was barely on the radar in late November.
But according to new estimates released Friday by the CDC, XBB.1.5 now accounts for almost a third of new infections and is the dominant variant in the Northeast.
"The current increase in cases that we are seeing really began around the Thanksgiving holiday when people gathered.
And as we went into the bigger holiday season — the Hanukkah/Christmas holiday season — that has accelerated infections further," Jha says.
Because "every major holiday has led to a bump in cases throughout the entire pandemic, it stands to reason that we're going to see a clear increase in infections, and
cases and hospitalizations, unfortunately, over the next few weeks," he says.
THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor
Why omicron subvariant XBB.1.5 is spreading so fast
The prevalence of the coronavirus's omicron subvariant XBB.1.5
"shot up like a rocket," says Sam Scarpino, who has been tracking new variants at Northeastern University.
"This variant has displaced other variants in a way that we've never seen before.
That's kind of alarming.
"
The good news is that so far there's no evidence the new variant makes people sicker than earlier versions of the coronavirus.
And the immunity that people have from getting infected and vaccinated should protect most from getting really sick.
So no one thinks this winter will be anything like the first two horrific pandemic winters.
But XBB.1.5 can partially sneak around immunity as easily as anything before it.
And it has developed something none of its predecessors had: a mutation that lets it infect cells more easily than the others.
That makes this version of COVID-19 even easier to catch.
"The question is not whether [XBB.1.5 is] going to cause a surge.
It almost certainly will.
The question is: How big is the surge going to be?"
"XBB.1.5 has gotten a specific mutation that enables it to maintain antibody escape properties while also giving it an advantage for spreading through the population," says Jesse Bloom, a virologist at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center in Seattle who has been studying variants.
That means lots of people are probably going to get COVID-19 this winter.
"The question is not whether it's going to cause a surge.
It almost certainly will.
The question is: How big is the surge going to be?"
Scarpino says.
So public health authorities are once again urging people to protect themselves.
How to protect yourself from coronavirus subvariant XBB.1.5
"What is clearer now, compared to even a year ago, is that we can really blunt the worst of it by doing the things that we know work," Jha says.
That includes getting vaccinated and boosted, especially if you're older.
Most deaths from COVID-19 are occurring in people age 65 or older.
Other precautions include avoiding crowded, poorly ventilated parties, restaurants, bars and other places; testing before gathering; and, yes, putting that mask back on in risky situations.
And if you do get sick, check with your doctor about getting treatment quickly.
"It is a time not to let your guard down," warns Dr. Tina Tan, an infectious disease specialist at Northwestern University.
Fortunately, most of the precautions that lower your risk of catching COVID-19 will also help protect you against any resurgence of RSV or the flu.
The winter is still young, and the flu is still circulating at fairly high levels in many places, experts note, which means many people are still suffering through fevers, body aches, chills and other symptoms.
And the holidays may have jump-started more infections that will continue to surface and spread in the coming days as people return home from trips and family gatherings, schools reopen and people go back to work.
The U.S. could see another flu wave later this winter.
That's what happened in some parts of the Southern Hemisphere's winter, and it often occurs in the Northern Hemisphere too.
Copyright 2023 NPR.
To see more, visit https://www.npr.org.
In early March 2020, as the nation succumbed to a pandemic, a group of young scientists walked out of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.
They left quietly, one or two at a time, through the building’s front doors, flashing their badges at guards, instead of through side exits where their departures would be recorded.
Gathering in a small park across the street, they stood with their coffees in hand and agonized over some shocking developments.
All through February 2020, agency scientists had been gathering evidence that the new coronavirus was being spread by people without symptoms.
In early March, the C.D.C. said that any employee who had been deployed elsewhere to track Covid-19 must isolate at home for 14 days, whether or not he or she had symptoms.
To the scientists gathered outside, trainees in the agency’s vaunted Epidemic Intelligence Service, the implication was clear: C.D.C. leaders realized that the virus was being spread not just by people who were coughing and sneezing, but also by people who were not visibly ill.
But the agency had not yet warned the public.
Health personnel are preparing injection syringes with Covid-19 vaccine in 2021 in Copenhagen, Denmark.
the country has now announced it will suspend its vaccination program and will review whether it's needed later in the year.
Ole Jensen | Getty Images News | Getty Images
Denmark has become the first country to halt its Covid vaccination program, saying it is doing so because the virus is now under control.
"Spring has arrived, vaccine coverage in the Danish population is high, and the epidemic has reversed," the Danish Health Authority said in a statement Wednesday.
"Therefore, the National Board of Health is now ending the broad vaccination efforts against Covid-19 for this season," it said.
People will not be invited for vaccines from May 15, it said, although everyone will be able to finish their course of vaccination.
watch now
Denmark's Covid vaccination campaign began soon after Christmas in 2020.
Some 4.8 million citizens have been vaccinated, the health authority said, with more than 3.6 million people receiving a booster shot.
At the same time, many people have been infected since the omicron variant became the dominant strain of the virus, it said, meaning immunity levels among the population are high.
"We are in a good place," Bolette Soborg, unit manager at the National Board of Health, commented.
"We have good control of the epidemic, which seems to be subsiding.
Admission rates [to hospitals] are stable and we also expect them to fall soon.
Therefore, we are rounding up the mass vaccination program against Covid-19.
"
Soborg insisted that the public can still be vaccinated over the spring and summer if they want, and that vaccination sites will remain open around the country.
He added that immunization was still recommended to people for whom Covid poses a heightened risk, such as those over the age of 40 and for unvaccinated pregnant women.
"We also continue to recommend that you complete your started vaccination course," he said.
Vaccinations likely to resume
Denmark's move to suspend its vaccination program comes as the Covid situation around the world remains mixed.
Europe and the U.S. have abandoned most Covid restrictions, but China is still imposing (or considering) lockdowns as the virus spreads in major cities like Shanghai and Beijing.
Far from scrapping its vaccination program altogether, however, the Danish Health and Medicines Authority said there will probably be a need to vaccinate against Covid-19 again in the fall as the virus continues to mutate.
watch now
CNN —
As the nation anticipates the end of the Covid-19 public health emergency, new research is showing that some groups are still feeling the long-term impacts of the disease.
In the year following infection, individuals who experience long Covid are at high risk for a range of adverse health outcomes, including a doubled risk of death, according to a new study published Friday in JAMA Health Forum.
The study examined insurance claims data for 13,435 adults with long Covid and 26,870 without Covid-19 during a 12-month follow-up period.
Accounting for factors present prior to infection, the long Covid group experienced increased mortality, with 2.8% individuals with long Covid dying compared to 1.2% of those without long Covid.
Those with long Covid were also roughly two times more likely to experience cardiovascular events including arrhythmias, stroke, heart failure and coronary artery disease.
Pulmonary conditions were also common.
The risk of pulmonary embolism more than tripled while the risk of COPD and moderate or severe asthma nearly doubled for those with long Covid.
The study found that risks were greatest among individuals hospitalized within a month of a Covid infection.
“We know from published literature that long Covid can result in fatigue, headache and attention disorder,” said Dr. Andrea DeVries, Staff Vice President for Health Services Research at Elevance Health and the lead author of the study.
“While those conditions are concerning, the results from this study point to even more worrisome outcomes that can severely impact quality and length of life for individuals with long Covid.”
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention defines long Covid as having new, returning, or ongoing health issues more than four weeks after onset of initial infection.
According to research by the CDC, one in five Covid-19 survivors ages 18 to 64 and one in four survivors 65 years or older experience an ongoing health issue that might be attributable to Covid-19 infection.
Long Covid has been associated with more than 200 signs and symptoms and 50 health conditions.
Experts say the health consequences can last from months to years.
“We can only measure out as far as the pandemic has been happening, but early evidence suggests that a large portion of people who experienced post-Covid condition are doing so more than two years after their initial infection, which is basically as long as it could be,” said Dr. Mark Czeisler who wrote a related editorial also published in JAMA Health Forum.
Research has shown that Covid reinfection substantially increases an individual’s risk of death, hospitalization, and health consequences from long Covid.
For example, the risk of cardiovascular disorders increases from 1.6 with one infection, to 3.0 with two infections and 4.8 with three or more infections.
“It’s demonstrating that it’s not like you have Covid once and then if you don’t get acutely ill or you don’t develop long Covid from that first infection that the coast is clear,” said Czeisler, who was not involved in the study.
Other risk factors for long Covid include older age, being female, tobacco use, higher body mass index, and experiencing more symptoms during the acute Covid-19 illness.
Being vaccinated prior to infection has been associated with a decreased risk of long Covid, according to previous research.
Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.
The study authors say these findings call for continued efforts to prevent Covid-19 infections and enhanced health monitoring of individuals after an infection.
“The biggest takeaway is that long Covid is a health condition that we need to continue to study and take seriously,” said DeVries.
WASHINGTON – U.S. Senator Tim Scott (R-S.C.), member of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, joined Fox News’ Fox & Friends to discuss the importance of faith in American life and address the Biden administration’s failure to confront China’s lies about the outbreak of COVID-19.
Click here to watch the full interview.
On the constitutional right of religious liberty… “Our Constitution protects our right to share our gospel, to love our God, and to be who we are wherever we are – no boundaries for our faithful experience and our faithful expressions in the public forum.
Our Constitution protects our freedom of religion, it doesn’t prohibit it.”
On the Biden Administration’s lack of transparency about the origins of COVID-19… “This administration continues to have too little, too late.
They simply want to hide the information, when, in fact, we have compelling evidence that the Wuhan lab, not nature, is the reason why COVID happened.
The more China lies, the more Americans die.
They deserve the truth.
The one thing we know about this President is he doesn’t seem to want to be honest with the American people.
Every time there is an option for him to tell the truth and the whole story, he pivots away.”
On believing in America… “The radical left continues to push this narrative that America is all about grievance.
We know we are all about greatness.
They believe this is not the land of opportunity, but the land of oppression.
Nothing could be further from the truth.”
Universitywide response earned an Indian Health Service Director’s Award for COVID-19 Pandemic Heroism.
When the University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) opened its COVID-19 Vaccination Clinic in 2021, a partnership blossomed with the Indian Health Service (IHS) and Native American LifeLines Urban Indian Organization to provide vaccines for Native Americans.
Now, UMB is being honored for its “unprecedented work to offer COVID-19 vaccines to American Indian/Alaska Natives living and working in and near the Baltimore and Washington, D.C., areas.”
On Nov. 18, Jonathan Bratt, MS, NRP, CEM, executive director, UMB Office of Emergency Management (OEM); Laura Cathcart, PhD, training and exercise program manager, OEM; and Cherokee Layson-Wolf, PharmD, BCACP, FAPHA, professor and associate dean of student affairs, University of Maryland School of Pharmacy (UMSOP), attended the IHS National Director’s Awards in Rockville, Md., to receive the IHS Director’s Award for COVID-19 Pandemic Heroism.
This award recognizes exceptional, dedicated work and selfless responses during the COVID-19 pandemic that advanced the IHS mission and vision.
Jane M. Kirschling, PhD, RN, FAAN, the Bill and Joanne Conway Dean of the University of Maryland School of Nursing, played a pivotal leadership role in establishing the clinic.
The School of Pharmacy, OEM, Environmental Services, Student Affairs and SMC Campus Center, Parking and Transportation Services, Office of Emergency Management, UMB Police Department, and the Office of Communications and Public Affairs also played critical roles in the COVID-19 Vaccination Clinic and partnership with IHS.
“I’m proud of the dozens, even hundreds of people who came together to make this a success,” Bratt said.
“This collaboration shows how UMB works to improve the human condition for not only our UMB community, but also for all of Maryland.”
During the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, Native American populations faced the highest mortality rate from the virus of any ethnicity.
The initiative, which aligns with UMB’s core value set of Equity and Justice, was an example of vaccine equity distribution to reach populations disproportionately affected by COVID-19.
“We want to do our part to get as many people vaccinated as possible — and especially those who are disproportionally affected by the illness or have difficulty with access,” UMB President Bruce E. Jarrell, MS, FACS, said when the partnership was established in 2021.
The clinic administered more than 40,000 COVID-19 vaccinations to the UMB, West Baltimore, and Native American communities.
UMB was the only clinic of its kind in the region, specifically arranged to serve the 65,000 Native Americans from Maryland, Virginia, and Washington, D.C.
The SMC Campus Center, where the vaccine clinic was located, has worked with indigenous communities during the construction and opening of the building in 2009.
The lobby prominently features an inscription that reads, “The SMC Campus Center aims to promote Indigenous visibility and encourage support of Indigenous communities who lived on the land where our building stands.”
The IHS Director’s Awards ceremony coincided with National Native American Heritage Month.
(In photo, from left: Laura Cathcart, Cherokee Layson-Wolf, and Jonathan Bratt at the IHS National Director’s Awards on Nov. 18)
Robert Lyle, a 44-year-old Woodstock resident, is a member of the Georgia COVID long-haulers Facebook group, an online community of Georgians who share resources like which physicians are taking new patients nearby and what medications help bypass their virus symptoms the longest.
Lyle is like many members of the group who have had to either significantly reduce their working hours, retire, or face termination due to the long-term toll of the virus.
“I’m not able to work anymore.
I’m not able to go to the gym.
Most of the time, I do have good days, but there’s a lot of times where I might be stuck at my house for two or three weeks at a time,” Lyle said.
The COVID-19 pandemic has seemingly been buried within our collective consciousness since the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services declared an end to the state of emergency earlier this year, but many Americans in their prime working years spend restless days hoping a solution to long-COVID, an invisible debility, will become clear soon.
Post-COVID symptoms can manifest a few weeks after the initial infection in some individuals and can persist for months, even years later.
About 14% of adults in Georgia experienced post-COVID symptoms in the last month, the U.S. Census Bureau reports.
In many of the cases Alex Truong works on, patients report having insomnia, increased rates of anxiety and depression or worsening of baseline symptoms, said the Emory University School of Medicine assistant professor.
Long-haulers, the term used to describe people affected by prolonged cycles of brain fog, fatigue and shortness of breath, look to a number of avenues to find treatment – knowing research into a long-lasting cure is uncertain and will remain in its rudimentary phase for some time.
Lyle often thinks back on his life before he initially caught COVID in 2020.
He worked as a personal trainer and a nutrition coach, but now his energy levels wane so easily that just having coffee with friends, let alone traveling long distances for doctor visits, can induce chronic fatigue for up to a week.
“I was that gym rat,” Lyle said.
“I was that annoying guy on social media that was always yelling ‘you can do it!’
I had a great life – you know.
Healthy, great job, social life, all that good stuff.
And then I got COVID and everything goes downhill.”
“And over the last two and a half years.
It’s been kind of a cycle
but I have good days I have bad days.
I have good weeks, I have bad weeks,” Lyle said.
Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp declared a public health state of emergency in March 2020, and researchers are still at a loss to explain why some people are unable to shake the most severe symptoms within a week or so.
“There’s a lot of theories asking whether or not it’s because you have persistent inflammation from that initial infection that just never went away,” said Truong.
“There’s (also) a cluster of folks who believe that it has to do with persistent histamine production in a condition called mast cell activation syndrome.”
However, emerging research from the United Kingdom found that after adjusting for age, sex and disease severity, inflammation is likely not the underlying cause of long COVID.
While this shows some progress is being made, it is only scraping the surface by filtering out the unlikely cause of the syndrome.
“Patients with severe COVID-19 were found to display a higher number of long COVID symptoms compared to mild and moderate patients,” wrote the authors of the study.
“However, further analysis by the team revealed no direct association between long COVID symptoms and immune inflammatory responses.”
Associate Professor of Neurology at the Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University, Elizabeth Rutkowski, said this condition can be very disabling, and the emotional stigma for some patients compounds with the severe side effects that long COVID has on the brain.
“I think early on in the pandemic, when people were experiencing these symptoms, some of them were dismissed and told that you know, there’s a lot of social isolation, so that’s why you don’t feel as energetic or why you don’t feel as joyful as you otherwise might have,” Rutkowski said.
“But I think the more and more we learn about this, we begin to understand that the virus does infect the brain,” Rutkowski said.
“It does have the potential to induce inflammation.
And it’s very, very disabling for some patients.
It is enough where very bright, high-functioning individuals can no longer operate or even be employed.”
Many long-haulers in Georgia are frustrated with the limited care that is available and the uphill battle that struggling with a disability can present, especially when research into the cause and lasting impact of long COVID seems to always carry a negative stigma from employers and loved ones.
“I think we’re only starting to get to a point where we can recognize post-COVID syndrome as a limitation to work and thus represents a disability that you can apply for,” Truong said.
“I think there are lots of companies and lots of institutions that just don’t recognize them.
And then you know, that results in a lot of our patients getting fired or having to be forced to retire early.”
“Several of our patients in our study here at the Medical College of Georgia have stated that they are on disability from their jobs.”
Rutkowski said.
“It’s to the point where even firing off a single email is enough to wipe them out for the entire day.”
Rutkowski and Truong say that even though the information that is available may not provide long haulers with the answers they want right now, vaccinations remain a sure fire way to prevent the spread of the infection and the risk of developing long-COVID.
CNN —
Deaths caused by alcohol use in the United States spiked during the Covid-19 pandemic, killing more than 49,000 people in 2020, according to data published Friday by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The alcohol-induced death rate has been steadily increasing in recent decades, but it jumped 26% between 2019 and 2020 – making nearly the same climb in one year as over the decade before.
In 2020, alcohol caused 13 deaths for every 100,000 people, up from 10.4 deaths for every 100,000 people in 2019.
“What’s a word bigger than crisis?” said Marvin Ventrell, chief executive officer of the National Association of Addiction Treatment Providers.
“What was already a crisis, has exploded.”
Alcoholic liver disease was the underlying cause for more than half of the alcohol-induced deaths in 2020, followed by mental and behavioral disorders due to use of alcohol.
This analysis does not include deaths where alcohol use may have directly contributed but was not the only factor.
Including other deaths attributable to excessive alcohol use but not directly caused by it – such as cancer, heart disease and unintentional injuries like car accidents – nearly triples the number of alcohol-related deaths, according to the CDC.
This would bring the number of alcohol-related deaths well past the number of drug overdose deaths, which reached record levels during the Covid-19 pandemic.
Americans drank more during the Covid-19 pandemic, which experts say created an environment ripe for alcohol abuse.
“We know that in large-scale traumatic events to the population – like 9/11 or Hurricane Katrina – people historically start drinking more.
The pandemic has been, as we all know, a major stressor to our lives,” George F. Koob, director of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
“What we’ve been picking up with numerous small studies is that about 25% of the population increased their drinking and these individuals were people who were drinking to cope with stress.
And many people who drink to cope with stress inevitably go on to have an alcohol use disorder.”
Broad social acceptance and easy accessibility make alcohol an easy option to cope with stress – and easy to miss problematic use, experts say.
“If a substance is harmful, the greater the access there is to that substance, the more harm it will create.
What is the most accessible substance?
Alcohol.
And what is the substance with the least social stigma relative to using it?
Alcohol,” Ventrell said.
“You might say ‘Joe drinks a little too much, but that’s just Joe.’
But no one says, ‘Joe uses a little too much meth, but he’s a good dad.’”
And while experts say the effects of alcohol abuse may be less immediate than other drugs, they’re no less devastating.
“Alcohol really has an insidious course, meaning that it produces wear and tear on your body over a long time,” said Dr. James Latronica, a family medicine doctor with addiction medicine services at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Western Psychiatric Hospital.
According to the CDC data, middle-aged men were most likely to die from excessive alcohol use in 2020.
The death rate was highest for men ages 55 to 64 – there were nearly 60 deaths for every 100,000 people in this age group, more than four times higher than the overall rate.
Death rates for women were also highest for that age group, but three times lower than for men.
But in the first year of the pandemic, death rates increased the most for younger men under 45 and the largest increases for women were among those between 25 and 44 – furthering evidence that alcohol is causing health issues for younger groups than before.
Another study published earlier this week found that in the five years prior to the Covid-19 pandemic, 1 in 5 deaths of US adults 20 to 49 was from excessive drinking.
At every age, men were at least twice as likely as women to die from alcohol-induced causes, but the overall gap narrowed in 2020.
Experts attribute some of this shift to the pandemic, too.
“There’s an interaction with mental health that has been more exposed during the pandemic,” Koob said.
Women are twice as likely as men to experience anxiety and depression, and the stresses of the pandemic likely hit extra hard.
“And women are also more vulnerable to the pathological effects of alcohol, everything from liver disease to some of the mental health interactions,” he said.
Because of the compounding effects of excessive alcohol abuse, experts say it’s likely that the effects of the pandemic will continue to cause elevated alcohol-induced deaths for years to come.
Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.
But better access to treatment can ease the loss; screening rates have improved, experts say, but fewer than one in 10 people with an alcohol use disorder are getting the treatment they need.
“With these studies, some people might worry if their relationship with alcohol is unhealthy,” Latronica said.
Alcohol can cause a lot of problems, he said, but it’s much easier to address them when you talk about them – and that can start at a primary care visit.
The original COVID-19 vaccines offered meaningful levels of protection against the worst outcomes of the disease over a year after the last dose, according to a study published Thursday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Protection against death or requiring a ventilator was “substantial” and “durable” during the first six months after the last shot, according to the study.
At 76%, it was the highest level of protection for any time period.
Still, even over a year later, the shots demonstrated “clinically meaningful levels of protection,” according to the study.
It remained about 56% effective against death and ventilation over a year later.
“These results suggest some waning of protection against [invasive mechanical ventilation] and death after 6 months from receipt of the last dose but demonstrate clinically meaningful levels of protection for ≥1 year,” the study authors wrote.
Cartoons on the Coronavirus View All 100 Images
The study looked at adults from February 2022 through the end of January 2023 who had at least two doses and at most four doses of the original shot.
The study did not take into account previous infection.
Notably, it found that “protection against these critical outcomes appeared to correlate more closely with time since last dose than with total number of doses received.”
The original COVID-19 shot is no longer offered in the U.S. after federal agencies last week agreed to switch all the doses over to the bivalent vaccine, which targets the original coronavirus strain as well as subvariants of omicron.
“At this stage of the pandemic, data support simplifying the use of the authorized mRNA bivalent COVID-19 vaccines and the agency believes that this approach will help encourage future vaccination,” Peter Marks, FDA’s top vaccine official, said in a statement.
Now, most unvaccinated Americans will be offered one updated bivalent shot instead of multiple doses of the original shot.
The federal agencies last week also allowed for certain Americans, including those over 65 years of age and some people with weakened immune systems, to get another updated COVID-19 booster shot this spring.
Federal officials are eyeing a fall booster campaign for the rest of the country to prepare for a potential winter wave of coronavirus.
As the world braves year three of the COVID-19 pandemic and confronts a virus that continues to evolve and challenge us, we’ve come a long way in how we combat this ongoing threat.
Since the start of this pandemic, vaccine manufacturers have produced more than 14 billion COVID-19 vaccine doses and built capacity to vaccinate everyone in the world.
That’s quite the feat considering where we started – at zero – just over two years ago.
These innovations have also resulted in greater efficiencies within the health care system – benefiting our economy through billions in cost savings.
The biopharmaceutical research industry has learned and witnessed some valuable lessons along the way.
This includes the role of intellectual property in enabling global partnerships and collaboration to deliver vaccines around the globe; the potential for digital health tools to facilitate the development of future medicines; and the need to take proactive steps to ensure that we are ready for future wide-reaching health threats.
In April 2022, PhRMA released a report that addresses in detail these key lessons and insights, which you can access on our website.
It’s also important to take a step back to mark the achievements and the progress that has been made in battling COVID-19.
Just last month, researchers estimated that COVID-19 vaccines prevented 19.8 million deaths across the globe in the first year of the pandemic.
Closer to home, an increasing number of studies are detailing the value that vaccines and treatments have had in the United States – on our health, our health care system and our economy.
Research has demonstrated:
Between December 2020 and March 2022, U.S. vaccination efforts prevented 2.3 million deaths; 17 million hospitalizations; 66 million infections; and saved $899 billion in health care costs.
– The Commonwealth Fund (April 2022)
– The Commonwealth Fund (April 2022) With 100% COVID-19 vaccine uptake, vaccines could have prevented an additional 234,000 deaths between June 2021 and March 2022, equivalent to 60% of adult COVID-19 deaths during that period.
– Kaiser Family Foundation (April 2022)
between June 2021 and March 2022, equivalent to 60% of adult COVID-19 deaths during that period.
– Kaiser Family Foundation (April 2022)
COVID-19 vaccines in early 2021 saved Medicare $2.6 billion by preventing 107,000 hospitalizations among older Americans .
Those savings from avoided hospitalizations were nearly large enough to offset the cost for around 68 million vaccine doses .
– Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (May 2022)
.
Those savings from avoided hospitalizations were .
– Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (May 2022)
By allowing economic activity to resume sooner, COVID-19 vaccines and treatments generated an estimated $438 billion in GDP in 2021, a 2.3% increase in real GDP .
–
Heartland Forwa rd (December 2021)
.
– Heartland Forwa “The arrival of safe and effective vaccines and…therapeutics has greatly mitigated [health care] costs, generating benefits that also measure in the trillions of dollars.”
- USC-Brookings (April 2022)
Despite these successes, there’s more work to be done.
Biopharmaceutical companies continue to research new ways to fight this pandemic through novel vaccines and treatments and ensuring there is manufacturing capacity to meet demand.
These investments include variant-specific vaccines, new antiviral treatments, pediatric clinical trials and more.
But challenges remain, particularly in terms of country readiness around the globe.
Even with ample vaccine supply, last-mile distribution challenges are resulting in the destruction of unused vaccines and countries around the world turning away critical vaccine donations.
We all have a role to play in curtailing the fallout from this ongoing battle with COVID-19.
For PhRMA’s part and the country’s leading innovative biopharmaceutical research companies it represents, we will build upon the lessons learned throughout this pandemic to meet patient health needs now and in the future.
We also encourage America’s policymakers to defend and advocate for the millions of American jobs supported by the biopharmaceutical research industry as it continues to invest in vaccines and treatments that have saved millions of lives and billions of dollars benefitting America’s economy.
Can Metformin Treat COVID-19 and Prevent Long COVID?
NCATS and Partners Pursue Answers
September 18, 2023
At the COVID-19 pandemic’s start, there were no proven, effective medications to treat the disease.
In the search for therapies, repurposing existing drugs offered a faster route to answers than developing drugs from scratch.
Scientists scoured drug compound catalogs for contenders that worked in ways that might show promise against COVID-19.
Creative rendition of SARS-CoV-2 virus particles.
(NIAID)
Metformin was just such a contender.
NCATS’ role in finding and testing metformin as a treatment for COVID-19 has spanned the entire drug development process — from early observational studies all the way to large-scale clinical trials.
Now, the Accelerating COVID-19 Therapeutic Interventions and Vaccines (ACTIV) partnership’s ACTIV-6 clinical trial, overseen by NCATS, is testing metformin as an outpatient treatment for people with mild-to-moderate COVID-19.
Metformin’s addition to the nationwide ACTIV-6 testing lineup could bring clarity to the drug’s value in treating COVID-19 and potentially preventing long COVID.
“By leveraging our networks and data-driven tools, we are speeding the delivery of important answers on metformin's ability to help people manage acute and long COVID symptoms,” said NCATS Director Joni L. Rutter, Ph.D. “These innovative approaches to study existing therapies could provide a foundation for integrating clinical trial and real-world data to get definitive answers from future clinical studies faster.”
The Case for Metformin in COVID-19
Metformin is a mainstay in type 2 diabetes treatment.
Effective, safe and affordable, metformin does more than just moderate blood sugar levels.
Metformin also suppresses key molecules that promote inflammation and blood clots.
Those pro-inflammatory molecules contribute to type 2 diabetes and obesity — conditions that are primary risk factors for more severe COVID-19.
Metformin may also have relevant antiviral activity.
Research has shown that metformin blocks SARS-CoV-2 from replicating itself.
These properties spawned a hypothesis.
If metformin reduces the inflammatory molecules that drive COVID-19 and the conditions known to increase COVID-19 risk, and if it also has antiviral activity, the diabetes drug might be repurposed as an effective COVID-19 treatment.
Observational Glimmers of Promise
Observational studies early in the COVID-19 pandemic pointed to just such potential.
In a 2020 review, NCATS Clinical and Translational Science Awards (CTSA) Program-supported researcher Carolyn Bramante, M.D., assistant professor of medicine at the University of Minnesota, and her colleagues examined electronic health records (EHRs) from adults with type 2 diabetes or obesity.
They found that women taking metformin before they developed COVID-19 were significantly less likely to die after being hospitalized — although men didn’t see the same protective effect.
Another 2021 observational study of EHRs found that people with diabetes who were on metformin when they developed COVID-19 were significantly less likely to die from COVID-19.
The NCATS National COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C) enclave of EHR-derived data powered two large studies that reinforced a potential link between metformin and less-severe COVID-19 outcomes.
One study of EHRs from more than 6,600 adults found that those with type 2 diabetes who were taking metformin before developing COVID-19 were less likely to be hospitalized, need mechanical ventilation or die.
A second study of people with either prediabetes or polycystic ovary syndrome (a condition commonly treated with metformin) showed that metformin use was linked to less severe COVID-19.
Observational studies usually aren’t enough to change medical practice, however.
Metformin would have to deliver results in large randomized, placebo-controlled trials specifically designed to answer the question of whether metformin is helpful for treating COVID-19.
Two such trials, TOGETHER and COVID-OUT, would give metformin the chance to prove itself as an effective COVID-19 treatment.
TOGETHER
Trial: The First Clinical Test
Metformin’s first large randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial was the TOGETHER trial —and it didn’t deliver clear evidence of effectiveness against COVID-19.
TOGETHER put a handful of repurposed drugs to the test as COVID-19 treatments in high-risk people in low- and middle-income countries.
In TOGETHER’s metformin arm, researchers randomized high-risk adults in Brazil with COVID-19 to outpatient care with either metformin or placebo.
Those on metformin took a 750-mg dose twice a day — 1,500 mg daily — for 10 days.
In their published results, the TOGETHER trial researchers found no benefit to back metformin as an outpatient treatment for early-stage COVID-19.
Among the 418 people in the trial’s metformin arm, metformin didn’t significantly top placebo at reducing hospitalization or delivering better clinical improvement after 28 days.
Among those who stuck with the TOGETHER trial’s 1,500-mg dosing treatment regimen, data in the study’s appendix did show metformin presented an advantage over placebo.
COVID-OUT:
Metformin Shows Promise
The 2022 COVID-OUT trial put metformin to a second test.
Bramante and her fellow researchers conducted the trial at six sites in the United States.
The COVID-OUT research team relied in part on grants from NCATS, as well as regulatory and logistical support from the University of Minnesota’s Clinical and Translational Science Institute, a CTSA Program-funded institution.
Participants were age 30–85 years, overweight or obese, and had a new COVID-19 diagnosis.
COVID-OUT’s primary goal was to see how many people went on to develop severe disease after 14 days of outpatient treatment.
Four factors defined “severe” COVID-19: low blood oxygen levels, tested by people at home; an emergency department visit; hospitalization; or death.
Like TOGETHER, COVID-OUT tested multiple repurposed drugs.
Three groups of people were randomized to receive metformin in combination with fluvoxamine, ivermectin or placebo.
A fourth group received placebo.
Two more groups received either ivermectin or fluvoxamine with placebo.
Rather than starting at the TOGETHER Trial’s 1,500-mg daily metformin dose, COVID-OUT began lower and raised metformin doses over 6 days to reach the 1,500-mg level, where it remained through 14 days.
The COVID-OUT trial also used immediate-release metformin, which has a higher systemic peak than the extended-release formulation used in the TOGETHER trial.
The COVID-OUT researchers analyzed data from 1,323 people who enrolled in the trial between December 2020 and January 2022.
None of the three drugs — including metformin — significantly reduced people’s risk of severe COVID-19, compared with placebo.
Metformin’s outlook changed, however, when the researchers removed potentially problematic patient-measured oxygen levels from their definition of severe COVID-19.
After the trial’s start, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration issued a safety communication on pulse oximeters’ accuracy.
When the researchers excluded low blood oxygen levels, people with COVID-19 who took metformin were 42% less likely to end up in the emergency department, hospitalized or dead.
The effect was even greater when the researchers focused on the numbers for hospitalization or death — a 53% reduction with metformin.
COVID-OUT Zooms in on Long COVID
COVID-OUT’s results pointed to more than therapeutic potential in the early stages of COVID-19.
In a separate research question, the investigators assessed the development of long COVID — the signs, symptoms, and conditions that linger or start after COVID-19 infection.
Metformin use also showed links to lower rates of long COVID.
The COVID-OUT researchers followed study participants months after treatment.
Among the 1,126 people followed long-term, 8.3% developed long COVID by 10 months.
But those who took metformin for early-stage COVID-19 were 41% less likely to later develop long COVID (6.3% of people) than the people who received placebo (10.4% of people).
Metformin’s effect on reducing the risk of long COVID held regardless of people’s sex, body mass index, whether a person had been vaccinated, or the dominant SARS-CoV-2 variant during treatment.
People who started metformin within three days of the start of COVID-19 symptoms were less likely to develop long COVID than those who started four or more days after their symptoms began.
ACTIV-6 Could Bring Greater Clarity
In the wake of TOGETHER and COVID-OUT, the ACTIV-6 trial could bring greater clinical-trial clarity on metformin.
ACTIV-6 is a large, randomized, placebo-controlled phase 3 clinical trial testing medications to treat mild-to-moderate COVID-19 in an outpatient setting.
The trial is a public-private partnership that has already tested fluticasone, two dosages of fluvoxamine, and two dosages of ivermectin.
None of those drugs delivered therapeutic benefit, compared with placebo, in ACTIV-6.
A trial arm testing montelukast recently completed enrollment.
The trial’s new metformin arm opened for enrollment Sept. 5, 2023.
NCATS oversees ACTIV-6, and key players in the trial’s operations include CTSA Program-funded institutions.
The Duke Clinical Research Institute is the ACTIV-6 clinical coordinating center, and the Vanderbilt Institute for Clinical and Translational Research is the trial’s data coordinating center.
Other CTSA Program institutions are part of the trial’s enrollment treatment network, as is the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute-funded National Patient-Centered Clinical Research Network (PCORnet).
The metformin trial arm will have two primary outcomes.
The first will be the time to sustained recovery from COVID-19 symptoms, assessed for up to 28 days after the start of treatment.
The second will be hospitalization or death among study participants, also measured for up to 28 days.
In addition, ACTIV-6 researchers will assess whether metformin prevents urgent care and emergency department visits, as well as any effects on quality-of-life measures.
Those quality-of-life assessments will extend to six months after treatment begins.
Researchers will use the trial’s extended follow-up to explore potential links between metformin treatment and symptoms suggestive of long COVID.
“Confronted by a global public health catastrophe, NCATS and the CTSA Program institutions have used a flexible, holistic approach to accelerate the search for effective COVID-19 treatments,” said Michael G. Kurilla, M.D., Ph.D., director of NCATS’ Division of Clinical Innovation.
“By innovating in real time, we are working to deliver evidence-based COVID-19 therapies that demonstrably help people.”
Predicting the dynamics of an epidemiological evolution is of utmost importance to control its spread in a population.
Modeling by a SIR-based model is conventional in control applications because of its simplicity and real-time applicability.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus, however, presents high mutability, which affects model parameters over time.
In addition, a relevant percentage of the population has been getting vaccinated in 2021, which also affects those parameters.
Both uncertainty sources were irrelevant in the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, but their systematic increase make long-term forecasts unreliable.
Hence, an accurate system estimate over an extended analysis period requires state feedback.
In this work, the state feedback was done by simultaneous state and parameter estimation using an augmented vector.
In this section, a compartmental model is adapted to improve estimation performance considering data availability in Brazil.
The model in Equation (1) was adapted from the SIDARTHE model proposed by Giordano et al.30 Hence, it assumes homogeneous states without age structure or the effect of vaccination coverage.
The estimated parameters \(\alpha _0\), \(x_c\), and \(x_m\) related to transmissibility, severity of the disease, and lethality, respectively, are described later in this section.
These parameters correlate with the dynamics analyzed in COVID-19 vaccine effectiveness studies31,32,33,34.
We have selected a federative unit per Brazilian region to evaluate epidemic progression countrywide, but the southeast region, the most populated one, is an exception with two units.
Amazonas (AM) was chosen for the north region; Mato Grosso do Sul (MS) for the central-west; Rio Grande do Norte (RN) for the northeast; Rio Grande do Sul (RS) for the south; Rio de Janeiro (RJ) and São Paulo (SP) for the southeast.
The total population \(N_i\) from each federative unit i consists of the following compartments:
Susceptible ( S ): individuals prone to infection;
Exposed ( E ): individuals infected in the incubation period, while they are not infectious;
Infected ( I ): undetected asymptomatic individuals;
Quarantined ( Q ): detected asymptomatic individuals who self-quarantine after detecting the disease;
Ailed ( A ): undetected symptomatic individuals;
Recognized ( R ): detected symptomatic individuals who self-quarantine after detecting the disease;
Threatened ( T ): individuals hospitalized in nursery or intensive care units (ICU);
Healed detected (\(H_d\)): detected individuals cured without treatment;
Deceased ( D ): individuals deceased due to the disease;
Healed with treatment (\(H_t\)): individuals cured after a hospitalization period;
Healed undetected (\(H_u\)):
individuals cured of the disease without being detected.
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d S}{dt}&= -
u S \end{aligned}$$ (1a)
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d E}{dt}&=
u S - \rho E \end{aligned}$$ (1b)
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d I}{dt}&= p \rho E - (\lambda +\varepsilon )
I \end{aligned}$$ (1c)
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d Q}{dt}&= \varepsilon I - \lambda _{d} Q \end{aligned}$$ (1d)
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d A}{dt}&= (1-p)
\rho E - (\theta +\mu +\kappa )
A \end{aligned}$$ (1e)
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d R}{dt}&= \theta A - (\mu _{d}+\kappa _{d})
R \end{aligned}$$ (1f)
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d T}{dt}&= \mu A +\mu _{d} R - (\sigma +\tau )
T \end{aligned}$$ (1g)
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d H_d}{dt}&= \lambda _{d} Q + \kappa _{d} R \end{aligned}$$ (1h)
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d
D}{dt}&=
\tau T \end{aligned}$$ (1i)
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d H_{t}}{dt}&= \sigma T \end{aligned}$$ (1j)
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d H_{u}}{dt}&=
\lambda I +
\kappa A \end{aligned}$$ (1k)
where all states are fractions of a total population \(N_i\), informed by the Ministry of Health of Brazil2.
\(
u\) is the infection rate, \(\rho\) is the incubation rate, and p is the fraction of infected individuals who remain asymptomatic.
\(\varepsilon\) and \(\theta\) are the detection rates of I and A, respectively.
\(\lambda\), \(\lambda _{d}\), \(\kappa\), \(\kappa _{d}\), and \(\sigma\) are the recovery rates of I, Q, A, R, and T, respectively.
\(\tau\) is the mortality rate, whereas \(\mu\) and \(\mu _{d}\) are severe illness rates of A and R, respectively.
Fig. 1 shows a scheme of the state transitions.
Figure 1 Schematic diagram of the proposed compartmental model.
Full size image
The analysis of several cases studies within a larger region provides spatial dynamics concerning virus spread.
The chosen federative units for the study are known to be heterogeneous among each other35,36,37 since Brazil is a large country where there were several different outbreaks dates, local government policies, and population behavior.
Brazilian spatial epidemic progression studies35,36 indicated multiple initial outbreaks spread progressively to neighboring territories.
The numerous government policies and population behavior are pointed out by the higher variance of the first wave duration of Brazilian states when compared to the United States and India variances37.
The healed compartment from the Giordano et al. model30 is subdivided into three compartments: \(H_{d}\), \(H_{u}\), and \(H_{t}\).
\(H_{t}\) is a measurable state by the Brazilian severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) database38,39.
\(H_{d}\) is an unmeasured state because the Brazilian SARS database accounts only for the hospitalized individuals, and the Ministry of Health of Brazil only provides recovered estimate countrywide.
However, the cumulative confirmed cases provided by the latter are composed mainly of \(H_{d}\) for any analysis post the first wave.
\(H_{u}\) is an unmeasured state containing most post-infection individuals for all studied federative units.
The closed system assumption of the compartmental model leads to the following constraint:
\(S + E
+ I + Q +
A + R + T +
H_d + D + H_t + H_u = 1\)
; thus, we substituted Equation (1k) by Equation (2).
$$\begin{aligned} H_{u} = 1 - S - E - I - Q - A - R - T - H_d - D - H_t \end{aligned}$$ (2)
The additional state E corresponds to a natural time delay of the system, which is usual in control-oriented models8,11 and forecasts to a lesser extent20,40,41.
Presymptomatic infected individuals are within this state as \((1-p)E\), but their infection rate is assumed insignificant to simplify parameter estimation.
Reinfections play a significant role in the resurgence of COVID-19 infection waves since new lineage might evade immunity from previous infections42.
Gamma43 and Delta44 mutations allow them to infect individuals recovered from other variants.
Hence, reinfections from natural immunity decrease are assumed negligible to the emergence of another variant.
The latter, however, can not be forecasted as they happen in occasional events.
Hence, S in the model Equation (1) is unconnected with healed compartments \(H_u\), \(H_t\), and \(H_d\), and the reinfection dynamics are assumed to be comprised in the state estimation.
The infection rate is simplified into a single parameter to guarantee observability.
Hence, infections caused by presymptomatic and detected infected are assumed to be insignificant compared to infections caused by undetected infected.
In addition, the same infection rate is applied to symptomatic and asymptomatic, although the first is acknowledged as more infectious45.
$$\begin{aligned}
u = \alpha (I + A) \end{aligned}$$ (3)
where \(\alpha\) is the contagion rate, consisting of the probability that a susceptible individual contracts the disease from possible contact with an infectious individual.
It is a function of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPI), vaccination coverage, and circulating variants.
NPI and vaccination mitigate virus spread in the short-term, while virus mutations might affect its transmissibility, as happened for the Gamma43 variant.
NPI dynamics are inserted into a compartmental model by time-varying functions20, independent variables9,11,12, or time-varying parameters estimated over time24,25.
We focused on these last two as they are better suited to a control-oriented model.
First, we separated social distancing from other NPI by defining \(\alpha\) according to Equation (4).
$$\begin{aligned} \alpha = \alpha _{0} (1 - u) \end{aligned}$$
(4)
where \(u \in [0,1]\) is the manipulated variable related to social distancing and \(\alpha _{0}\) is the estimated contagion rate.
The linearity applied over \(\alpha\) and u in Equation (4) gets the correct direction between the contagion rate and social distancing.
NPI unrelated to social distancing (e.g., mass gathering restrictions and mask requirements) are comprised in \(\alpha _{0}\).
Social distancing is measurable by Google mobility data as percentage changes concerning a baseline defined from data sets before the COVID-19 outbreak46.
Google mobility data are divided into six categories: recreation, essentials, parks, transit, workplace, and resident.
A linear combination among the two most independent categories is used to define u.
The similarity was measured by a zero-lag cross-correlation matrix through data from all federative units studied between February 2020 and July 2021.
The normalized cross-correlation, whose results are presented in Supplementary Table S1, was calculated using the xcorr function from MATLAB.
The absolute difference from zero characterizes the similarity between two signals, where independence is defined.
The essentials signal had a cross-correlation closer to zero for all categories except itself; however, it is a monthly periodic signal while the others are weekly reported.
Hence, the cross-correlation closest to zero, disregarding essentials, is related to parks and workplace; thus, they were selected to define u. Additionally, u was limited in the range [0,1], assuming each mobility category has lower and upper bounds on -100% and 100%, respectively.
A weighted sum to assimilate location-dependent correlations concerning each mobility category was used to evaluate u according to Equation (5).
$$\begin{aligned} \begin{aligned} u(t)&=\dfrac{-w_u\left\langle Parks(t)\right\rangle -(1-w_u)\left\langle Workplace(t)\right\rangle -(w_u
Parks_{min}+(1-w_u) Workplace_{min})}{w_u (Parks_{max}-Parks_{min})+(1-w_u) (Workplace_{max}-Workplace_{min})}\\&= \dfrac{-w_u \left\langle Parks(t)\right\rangle -(1-w_u)\left\langle Workplace(t)\right\rangle -(w_u
(-100)-(1-w_u)(-100))}{w_u(100-(-100))+(1-w_u)(100-(-100))}\\&= \dfrac{-w_u \left\langle Parks(t)\right\rangle -(1-w_u) \left\langle Workplace(t)\right\rangle +100}{200} \end{aligned} \end{aligned}$$ (5)
where \(\left\langle Parks(t)\right\rangle\) and \(\left\langle Workplace(t)\right\rangle\) are weekly moving averages of parks and workplace, respectively, and \(w_u\) is the relative weight concerning parks mobility, which is an additional parameter to be estimated in the model identification.
The fraction of individuals who do not experience symptoms is defined as \(p \in [0.15,0.7]\) according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)47.
Virus mutations, testing policies, and different age distribution explain the broad range.
The parameter p is not estimated over time because it is not observable from available data since there is no classification of symptomatic and asymptomatic.
Hence, we defined \(p=0.5\) as an intermediate value whose error is mitigated by the state estimator with estimations of I and A.
The vaccine efficacy against infection is correlated to both \(\alpha _{0}\) and p since it only measures symptomatic cases, according to U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
Following the vaccine efficacy against severe and mild diseases, a parameter \(x_c\) is defined as the fraction of symptomatic individuals who develop severe or mild symptoms.
Assuming that severe and mild illnesses imply hospitalization, thus \(x_c\) is the fraction of individuals moving from A and R to T. Summing up Equations (1e) and (1f):
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d(A+R)}{dt}= (1-p)
\rho E - (\mu +\kappa ) A - (\mu _{d}+\kappa _{d})
R \end{aligned}$$
which is simplified by assuming \(\mu \approx \mu _{d}\) and \(\kappa \approx
\kappa _{d}\) to:
$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d(A+R)}{dt}= (1-p) \rho E - (\mu +\kappa ) (A + R) \end{aligned}$$
Thus:
$$\begin{aligned} x_{c} = \frac{\mu }{\mu + \kappa } \end{aligned}$$
Let us rewrite \(\mu\) and \(\kappa\) as a probability function of the symptomatic individual to follow their ways, then:
$$\begin{aligned} x_{c} = \dfrac{(1-x_k-x_{\theta }) {\tilde{\mu }}}{(1-x_k-x_{\theta }) {\tilde{\mu }} + x_k
{\tilde{\kappa }}} \end{aligned}$$ (6)
where \(x_k\) and \(x_{\theta }\) are the probabilities of an individual in A to recover or to get detected, respectively.
The average rates of severe illness \({\tilde{\mu }}\) and symptomatic recovery \({\tilde{\kappa }}\) correspond to properties studied in the literature.
In this work, we defined \({\tilde{\mu }} = 1/5\ \text {d}^{-1}\) and \(\rho = 1/5.2\ \text {d}^{-1}\) from CDC47, and \({\tilde{\kappa }}\) was based on a study of the detection window and test sensitivity of IgG/IgM tests48.
The testing rate is a local and time-dependent property that affects both the probabilities \(x_k\) and \(x_{\theta }\).
Let us define the correlated parameter \(x_s\) as the fraction of recovered undetected individuals.
We have from Equation (1e):
$$\begin{aligned} x_{s} = \dfrac{\kappa }{\mu + \theta + \kappa } = \dfrac{ x_k
{\tilde{\kappa }}}{(1-x_k-x_{\theta }) {\tilde{\mu }} + x_{\theta } {\tilde{\theta }} + x_k
{\tilde{\kappa }}} \end{aligned}$$ (7)
Rewriting Equation (7) for \(x_k\):
$$\begin{aligned} x_{k} = \dfrac{x_s x_{\theta } {\tilde{\theta }} + (1-x_{\theta }) x_s
{\tilde{\mu }} }{(1-x_s) {\tilde{\kappa }} + x_s {\tilde{\mu }}} \end{aligned}$$
and substituting it in Equation (6) rewritten for \(x_{\theta }\):
$$\begin{aligned} x_{\theta } = \dfrac{(1-x_c-x_s) {\tilde{\kappa }} {\tilde{\mu }}}{(1-x_c-x_s) {\tilde{\kappa }} {\tilde{\mu }} + (1-x_c) x_s
{\tilde{\theta }} {\tilde{\mu }} + x_c x_s
{\tilde{\theta }} {\tilde{\kappa }}} \end{aligned}$$ (8)
Considering that \(x_{c}\) and \(x_{s}\) represent fractions of the symptomatic infected, then \(x_{s}+x_c \in [0,1]\).
Locations with a steadier testing policy could estimate \(x_s\) as a constant.
However, rapid tests and RT-PCR were not available in public health services in the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil.
Defining \(x_s\) as a logistic equation in the function of time according to:
$$\begin{aligned} x_{s} = a_{x_{s}} \left( 1-\frac{a_{\zeta }}{1+\exp {\left( -b_{\zeta } (t - c_{\zeta })\right) }}\right) \end{aligned}$$ (9)
where \(a_{x_{s}}\), \(a_{\zeta }\), \(b_{\zeta }\), and \(c_{\zeta }\) are identified model parameters.
The definition of Equation (9) is based on heuristics that \(x_s\) is initially high and decreases progressively to a steady state following test availability to the population.
These model parameters also comprises uncertainties regarding test policy.
Analogous to \(x_s\), we define the fraction of recovered undetected asymptomatic individuals \(x_{a}\) from Equation (1c) as:
$$\begin{aligned} x_{a} = \frac{\lambda }{\lambda +\varepsilon } = \frac{x_{id} {\tilde{\lambda }}}{x_{id} {\tilde{\lambda }} + (1- x_{id}) {\tilde{\varepsilon }}} \leftrightarrow x_{id} = \frac{x_{a} {\tilde{\varepsilon }}}{{\tilde{\lambda }} + x_{a} ({\tilde{\varepsilon }} - {\tilde{\lambda }})} \end{aligned}$$
where \(x_{id}\) is the probability of detecting the disease in an asymptomatic individual.
Defining \(x_a\) similarly to \(x_s\), we have:
$$\begin{aligned} x_{a} = a_{x_{a}} \left( 1-\frac{a_{\zeta }}{1+\exp {\left( -b_{\zeta } (t - c_{\zeta })\right) }}\right) \end{aligned}$$ (10)
where \(a_{x_{a}}\) is an additional identified model parameter.
Equations (9) and (10) have linear dependence between \(x_{s}\) and \(x_{a}\) to avoid overfitting of an excessive number of model parameters.
The ratio \(a_{x_{a}}/a_{x_{s}}\) comprises the effect of the viral load on the test sensitivity and the test probability between symptomatic and asymptomatic infected individuals.
Related uncertainties are assumed to be mitigated by state estimation among the states
I, Q, A, and R.
Finally, we define a parameter \(x_m\) analogous to vaccine efficacy against lethality as the fraction of threatened individuals who decease.
We define it from Equation (1g) as:
$$x_{m} = \frac{{\mathbf{\tau }}}{{\sigma + {\mathbf{\tau }}}}$$ (11)
Rewriting Equation (11) as a function of a death probability \(x_e\):
$$\begin{aligned} x_{m} = \frac{x_e {\tilde{\mathbf{\tau } }}}{(1-x_e){\tilde{\mathbf{\sigma} }} + x_e {\tilde{\mathbf{\tau } }}} \end{aligned}$$
and isolating \(x_e\) give us:
$$\begin{aligned} x_{e} = \frac{x_m {\tilde{\mathbf{\sigma} }}}{(1-x_m){\tilde{\mathbf{\sigma} }} + x_m
{\tilde{\sigma }}} \end{aligned}$$ (12)
where \({\tilde{\sigma }}\) is the average recovery rate from hospitalization and \({\tilde{\tau }}\) is the average mortality rate.
These parameters depend on healthcare demand, medical resources, notification delay, virus mutations, vaccine coverage, and testing policy.
Nonetheless, they are simplified as constants to allow future estimations since, by assumption, uncertainties are mitigated by the state and parameter estimation.
The definition of parameters equivalent to vaccine efficacy against transmissibility, severity of the disease, and lethality as functions of state transition rates give comprehensive information about the virus spreading dynamics.
The model uncertainties are outweighed by better parameter estimations by considering a fewer number of estimated parameters.
The definition of \(x_c\) and \(x_m\) yields additional flexibility in the model formulation.
Minor changes applied over \(\alpha _0\), \(x_m\), and \(x_c\) can express specific vaccine dynamics on the model.
Hence, their definition comprehends an alternative implementation of vaccination in compartmental modeling.
The Ministry of Health of Brazil2 provides accumulated data on confirmed cases, deceased, and their respective incidences for each federative unit and county.
The Brazilian SARS database38,39 provides clinical data from patients with a severe acute respiratory syndrome which comprehend confirmed and suspected cases of COVID-19 and other diseases.
It notifies the period of hospitalization, evolution date, the confirmation status of COVID-19, among other information.
Summing up all confirmed COVID-19 patients per each federative unit i gives observability on \(T_i\) and \(H_{t,i}\).
In addition, overall means of hospitalized evolution between April 2021 and July 2021 were used to define \({\tilde{\sigma }}\) and \({\tilde{\tau }}\).
Both databases are daily measured; hence sampling time \(T_s = 1\) d. Average testing rates \({\tilde{\varepsilon }}\) and \({\tilde{\theta }}\) are location-dependent; however, we assumed that correlated uncertainties are comprehended in \(a_{\zeta ,i}\), \(b_{\zeta ,i}\) and \(c_{\zeta ,i}\).
Hence, we defined \({\tilde{\varepsilon }} = {\tilde{\theta }}\)
= \(1\ \text {d}^{-1}\) to suit sampling time.
In summary, the monitored variable \(\mathbf {y_i}\) is defined as:
$$\begin{aligned} \mathbf {y_i}(k) = \mathbf {h}(\mathbf {x}_{\mathbf {i}})
= \begin{bmatrix} Q_i(k)+R_i(k)+T_i(k)+H_{d,i}(k) + D_i(k) + H_{t,i}(k)\\ D_i(k)\\ T_i(k)\\ H_{t,i} (k)\end{bmatrix} \end{aligned}$$ (13)
where \(\mathbf {x_i} = \left
[ S_i\ E_i\ I_i\ Q_i\ A_i\ R_i\ T_i\ H_{d,i}\ D_i\ H_{t,i} \right] ^T\).
EPICOVID19-BR provides additional data over temporal distributions in Brazil.
It surveyed COVID-19 prevalence in cities from all regions on different timelines49,50.
Let us consider the prevalence estimations from federative units given by Marra and Quartin51 based on three phases of EPICOVID19-BR.
Furthermore, if we assume \({\tilde{\lambda }}={\tilde{\kappa }}=1/15\ \text {d}^{-1}\), then we can correlate states \(H_{d,i}\) and \(H_{u,i}\) with test sensitivity.
EPICOVID19-BR did not test hospitalized patients49 and used an IgM and IgG antibody test more sensitive 15 days after the appearance of symptoms48.
Hence, the state transition model \(\mathbf {f}(\mathbf {x_i},u_i)\) for each federative unit i is defined in Equation (14).
$$\begin{aligned} \begin{aligned} \frac{d S_i}{dt}&= -
u _i S_i \\ \frac{d E_i}{dt}&=
u _i S_i - \rho E_i \\ \frac{d I_i}{dt}&= p \rho E_i - (\lambda _i+\varepsilon _i) I_i \\ \frac{d Q_i}{dt}&=
\varepsilon _i I_i - \lambda _
i Q_i \\ \frac{d A_i}{dt}&=
(1-p) \rho E_i - (\theta _i+\mu _i+\kappa
_
i)
A_i \\ \frac{d R_i}{dt}&=
\theta _
i A_i - (\mu _i+\kappa _i
) R_i \\ \frac{d T_i}{dt}&= \mu _
i (A_i + R_i) - (\sigma _i+\tau _i)
T_i\\ \frac{d H_{d,i}}{dt}&= \lambda _
i Q_i +
\kappa _
i R_i \\ \frac{d D_i}{dt}&= \tau _
i T_i\\ \frac{d H_{t,i}}{dt}&= \sigma _
i T_i\\ H_{u,i}&= 1 - S_i - E_i - I_i - Q_i - A_i - R_i - T_i - H_{d,i} - D_i - H_{t,i}\\
u _i&= \alpha _{0,i} (1 - u_i) (I_i + A_i)\\ x_{a,i}&= a_{x_{a,i}} \left( 1-\frac{a_{\zeta ,i}}{1+\exp {\left( -b_{\zeta ,i} (t - c_{\zeta ,i})\right) }}\right) ,\ x_{s,i} = a_{x_{s,i}} \left( 1-\frac{a_{\zeta ,i}}{1+\exp {\left( -b_{\zeta ,i} (t - c_{\zeta ,i})\right) }}\right) ,\\ x_{id,i}&= \frac{x_{a,i} {\tilde{\varepsilon }}}{{\tilde{\lambda }} + x_{a,i} ({\tilde{\varepsilon }} - {\tilde{\lambda }})}\\ x_{k,i}&= \frac{x_{s,i} x_{\theta ,i} {\tilde{\theta }}
+ (1-x_{\theta ,i})
x_{s,i} {\tilde{\mu }} }{(1-x_{s,i}) {\tilde{\kappa }} + x_{s,i} {\tilde{\mu }}},\\ x_{\theta ,i}&= \frac{(1-x_{c,i}-x_{s,i})
{\tilde{\kappa }} {\tilde{\mu }}}{(1-x_{c,i}-x_{s,i}) {\tilde{\kappa }} {\tilde{\mu }} + (1-x_{c,i})
x_{s,i} {\tilde{\theta }} {\tilde{\mu }} + x_{c,i} x_{s,i} {\tilde{\theta }} {\tilde{\kappa }}},\ x_{e,i} = \frac{x_{m,i} {\tilde{\sigma }}_i}{(1-x_{m,i}){\tilde{\tau }}_
i
+
x_{m,i} {\tilde{\sigma }}_i}\\
\lambda _i&= (1-x_{id,i}) {\tilde{\lambda }},\ \varepsilon _
i = x_{id,i} {\tilde{\varepsilon }},\
\theta _
i =
x_{\theta ,i} {\tilde{\theta }},\ \kappa _
i
= x_{k,i} {\tilde{\kappa }},\ \mu _
i =
(1- x_{k,i} - x_{\theta ,i}) {\tilde{\mu }},\\ \sigma _i&= (1-x_{e,i}) {\tilde{\sigma }}_i,\ \tau _
i
= x_{e,i} {\tilde{\tau }}_
i \end{aligned} \end{aligned}$$ (14)
Each federative unit i under study has prevalence distribution from EPICOVID19-BR formulated as Equation (15) for each phase \(j\in \{1,2,3\}\), assuming a test sensitivity of 100% during \(T_{p}\) days followed by a sudden decay to zero.
$$\begin{aligned} \begin{aligned} Pre_{i,j,min} \le \frac{1}{N_{total,j}} \sum _{k=0}^{N_{total,j}-1} \left( H_{all,i}(N_{ep,j}+k) - H_{all,i}(N_{ep,j}+k-T_{p}))\right) \le Pre_{i,j,max} \end{aligned} \end{aligned}$$ (15)
where prevalence bounds \(Pre_{i,j,min}\) and \(Pre_{i,j,max}\) can be found in Supplementary Table S251, and \(T_{p} = 50\) was the arbitrated value for the detection window.
\(t(N_{ep,1})=\text {14 May 2020}\), \(t(N_{ep,2})=\text {4 June 2020}\), \(t(N_{ep,3})=\text {21 June 2020}\) are initial dates from the first, second and third phases of EPICOVID19-BR, respectively, while \(N_{total,1}=8\) and \(N_{total,2}=N_{total,3}=4\) correspond to their respective duration in days, and \(H_{all,i} = H_{u,i}+H_{d,i}+H_{t,i}\).
In the early stages of the pandemic outbreak, recovered individuals are approximately null; thus, we defined \(H_{d,i}(N_{ep,j}+k-T_{p})=H_{t,i}(N_{ep,j}+k-T_{p})=H_{u,i}(N_{ep,j}+k-T_{p})=0 \forall \left\{ N_{ep,j}+k<T_{p}| j \in \{1,2,3\} \right\}\).
Gene sequences reported in GISAID7 indicate Zeta variant appearance in mid-October 2020.
Hence, the identification step is bounded at \(t(N_f)
= \text {1 October 2020}\) to guarantee the steady circulation of variants B.1.1.28 and B.1.1.33.
The lower bound aims at an imported infection neglectful in the system when \(\left[ I_i(t_{0,i})\ Q_i(t_{0,i})\ A_i(t_{0,i})\ R_i(t_{0,i})\ T_i(t_{0,i})\ H_{d,i}(t_{0,i})\ D_i(t_{0,i})\ H_{t,i}(t_{0,i})\ H_u(t_{0,i})
\right] ^T \approx {{\textbf {0}}}\).
Therefore, only \(S_i (t_{0,i})\) and \(E_i (t_{0,i})\) were considered optimization variables for the model identification.
Hospitalized individuals \(T_i\) were used to define \(\{N_{0,i}|t_{0,i} = t(N_{0,i})\}\) from the solution of a system composed by \(T_i(N_{0,i})>0.00003\), \(T_p-N_{ep,3}-N_{0,i} \ge 0\), \(N_{0,i} \in {\mathbb {N}}\), for each federative unit i.
The model identification is evaluated through an integral time-squared error performance criteria for reducing the contribution of the initial error of imported infections.
The nonlinear optimization problem in Equation (16) was solved for each federative unit i with IPOPT52 via CasADI/MATLAB53.
$$\begin{aligned} \begin{aligned} \min _{\mathbf {ident_i}}&\quad \sum _{k=N_{0,i}}^{N_f} (k-N_{0,i}+1) \left\Vert \mathbf {y_i}(k)-\mathbf {z_i}(k) \right\Vert _{\mathbf {Q_{id,i}}}^2\\ \text {Subject }&\text {to Equation}~(15)\text { and:}\\&\quad \mathbf {x_i}(k+1) = \mathbf {x_i}(k)
+ \int _{k}^{k+1} \mathbf {f}(\mathbf {x_i}(t),u_i(t))
\, d{t}\\&\quad \mathbf {y_i}(k) = \mathbf {h}(\mathbf {x_i}(k))\\&\quad S_i(t_{0,i})
\in
[0.9,1],\ E_i(t_{0,i})
\in [0,0.1],\ \alpha _{0,i} \ge 0,\ a_{x_{a,i}} \in
[0,0.1],\ a_{x_{s,i}} \in [0,0.1],\ x_{c,i} \in
[0,1],\ x_{m,i} \in
[0,1]\\&\quad a_{\zeta ,i}\ \in [0,1],\ b_{\zeta ,i} \in
[0,0.25],\ c_{\zeta ,i} \ge 0,\ x_{a,i} \in [0,1],\ x_{s,i} \in [0,1],\ x_{s,i} + x_{c,i} \in
[0,1],\ x_{a,i} \ge x_{s,i} \end{aligned} \end{aligned}$$ (16)
where \(\mathbf {ident_i} = \left
[ S_i(t_{0,i})\ E_i(t_{0,i})\ \alpha _{0,i}\ a_{x_{a,i}}\ a_{x_{s,i}}\ x_{c,i}\ x_{m,i}\ a_{\zeta ,i}\ b_{\zeta ,i}\ c_{\zeta ,i}\ w_{u,i}\right] ^T\), \(\mathbf {z_i}\) are the measured variables and \(\mathbf {Q_{id,i}} \in {\mathbb {R}}^{4\times 4}\) is a weight matrix calculated to normalize measurements from the early stages of the pandemic to July 2021 according to Equation (17).
All numerical integration in the state estimators were solved with CVODES54 via CasADI/MATLAB.
The initial guess was set as \(\mathbf {ident_{0,i}} =
[0.95\ 0.05\ 0.1\
0.9\
0.9\ 0.02\ 0.1\
0.1\ 0.1\
20\ 0.5]^T\).
Results and location-dependent parameters are shown in Table 1.
$$\begin{aligned} \mathbf {Q_{{id,i}_{j,j}}} = \dfrac{1}{\left( y_{j,max}-y_{j,min}\right) ^2}, j \in \{1,2,3,4\} \end{aligned}$$ (17)
Q. The Food and Drug Administration recently approved the new COVID-19 vaccines.
What does the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommended?
A.
The fall booster for COVID-19 is recommended for everyone 6 months and older.
I, in fact, have recommended to my oldest son that his daughters – my granddaughters – who are 1 and 3 years of age, receive it.
This is not only to prevent my granddaughters from being ill with COVID-19 and missing preschool, but also because children that age are at risk of severe disease and even death.
I think we all agree that no child should die of a vaccine-preventable illness.
Q.
When should people 65 and older and pregnant women get vaccinated?
A. The most urgent group to vaccinate right now is adults who are 65 years of age and older and pregnant women.
These two groups are at greatest risk of severe COVID-19 hospitalization.
In fact, the vast majority of hospitalizations and deaths in the United States today are those who are 65 to 75 years of age and older.
Pregnancy increases the risk of severe COVID-19 about twofold and appears to also have a small but significant increase in the risk of preterm birth, so that’s the reason for pregnant women to be vaccinated with this new fall booster sooner rather than later.
If you’ve had COVID-19 recently the CDC recommends that you wait at least three months before receiving this fall booster.
The reason for that is that you have relatively high levels of immunity immediately after a new infection.
Q.
What do you know about the new booster?
A. It’s very good news that the FDA has approved, and the CDC is now recommending, a new booster that is being made by both Moderna and Pfizer that is much better at combating the newest variants of the COVID-19 virus.
The vaccine was made against the variant that was most common July 1, so you might wonder “Well, is it really going to be any better than the booster that we all hopefully just received?”
The good news is that studies so far are showing that the new COVID-19 vaccine is making antibodies that are 10 times better not only at getting that old variant from this summer, but also these newest variants that we’re experiencing right now.
Q.
How prevalent is COVID-19 right now and why there is a spike?
A. There are a few reasons that this is happening right now.
Number one, the virus is continuing to evolve and mutate to evade the immunity that we got from the previous vaccines and from prior infections with COVID-19.
A new variant called EG.5 replaced XBB.1.5
as the most common variant over the summer.
Second, we understand now that immunity against COVID-19, whether it’s immunity from the vaccine or from infection, begins to diminish or wane one to four months later.
Finally, I think the other thing that may be contributing to this increase is that with the heat wave we’ve had this summer, people might be spending more time indoors where the virus is spread more readily than outdoors.
Q. Why are people who got the previous booster getting sick anyway?
A.
The short answer is of course that the booster is not 100% effective.
The old “bivalent” booster, of which 153 million doses have been given, has been shown to be 60% to 70% effective at preventing severe omicron.
The effectiveness of the booster is greatest in the month after you get it and then starts to wane, but this is still quite substantial protection on top of the protection that we already had from the original vaccine.
Across demographics, unvaccinated people are more likely to get COVID-19 and are more vulnerable to serious illness from the highly contagious virus.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, unvaccinated people are not only twice as likely to get COVID-19 but also three times more likely to be hospitalized.
And yet many people remain unvaccinated.
Mark McEnnis was a COVID-19 vaccine skeptic until it nearly took his life.
“I really don’t believe anything I hear and about half of what I see, so I was against getting the vaccine,” McEnnis said.
He was unvaccinated against COVID-19 and had no prior health issues when he contracted the delta variant in August 2021.
When first diagnosed, he didn’t fear the virus.
He thought he’d need a few days of rest and then be back at work and play.
But that’s not what happened.
With a high fever and labored breathing, McEnnis was admitted to a hospital in Nashua, N.H.
After a week of care, his condition worsened and he was transported Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center in Lebanon, N.H. About two months later, McEnnis suffered multiple infections and his family was preparing to say good-bye.
According to Donald J. Perreault, a nurse practitioner at DHMC, this period of the pandemic was one of the darkest times the hospital had ever experienced.
“There were people dying left and right,” he said.
McEnnis recovered from the virus.
He was deeply grateful to the staff at DHMC for saving his life.
“To see a guy like Mark with a family like his pull through the absolute rock bottom that this disease can present with, and not result in death, was a real rallying point for everybody in the MICU,” added Perreault.
Since then, McEnnis has received the COVID-19 vaccine and is sharing his story to urge others to get vaccinated and boosted.
“I know in my personal experience that probably 50 or 60 people that were against the vaccines immediately went out and got vaccinated, because of me,” McEnnis said.
“I would just say get it, because the alternative might be the end of it.”
Read McEnnis’ full treatment and recovery story here.
As states plan how they’ll spend the $25 billion remaining in federal COVID relief funds, some also are facing criticism and renewed scrutiny over how they allocated money already received from the American Rescue Plan Act.
Of the $198 billion authorized by Congress in 2021, $173 billion already has been appropriated by states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.
Much of the money went – as it was intended – to deal with the COVID-19 public health emergency, including social programs benefiting low-income communities, grants to help small businesses stay open, and pay for essential workers.
But civil rights groups and think tanks focused on economic and tax policy have pointed out that the money has gone to build prisons, offset tax cuts, and fund initiatives completely counter to improving public health, such as Arizona’s $163 million program to give grants to schools that didn’t have mask mandates.
The American Civil Liberties Union in a letter earlier this month requested that the Treasury Department investigate the misuse of ARPA funds.
The Institute of Taxation and Economic Policy has criticized tax cuts that it says are squandering revenue built up in part by the federal relief funds.
And the GOP-controlled House Committee on Oversight and Accountability on Wednesday held the first of what its chair, Republican Rep. James Comer of Kentucky, says will be many hearings examining how federal pandemic relief dollarswere spent.
In New Hampshire, a piece of the funding law that prevented states from using ARPA money to “either directly or indirectly” offset tax decreases has proven controversial.
In March 2021, the state joined a lawsuit with 12 other states seeking to block that provision, calling it “an excessive and unconstitutional exercise of congressional power.”
At the time, New Hampshire lawmakers were considering a number of tax breaks, including bringing the state’s business enterprise tax down to 0.55%, phasing out the interest and dividend’s tax by 2027, and reducing the number of businesses that needed to pay the state’s business taxes.
All of those changes were approved in the final budget signed by Gov. Chris Sununu that June.
The New Hampshire Fiscal Policy Institute estimated in 2021 that the tax reductions would result in the state taking in about a quarter billion dollars less in revenue than it would have had the taxes not been changed.
And in its commentary that year, the Institute on Taxation and Economic policy criticized New Hampshire’s focus on phasing out the interest and dividends tax, which the Fiscal Policy Institute estimated as primarily benefiting wealthy residents over low-income residents.
New Hampshire has used a vast majority of its $17 billion in COVID-19 relief money for public health, education, mental health and substance use treatment, unemployment, and other housing and food benefits for individuals and families.
Some American Rescue Plan Funds went to the Department of Corrections.
The department spent $7.15 million upgrading its offender management system; $1.42 million on ventilation improvements; $1.32 million to update fiber optic technology; and about $540,000 to bring in the National Guard to help with a staffing shortage crisis, according to the Legislative Budget Office.
As of November, the state had spent $903 million, 91.5% of its ARPA state fiscal recovery funds, leaving $91.5 million, about 9%, available, according to ananalysis from the New Hampshire Fiscal Policy Institute.
Most of that money went to water infrastructure, about $240 million, and building upgrades, $143.5 million.
The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a nonpartisan research institute, has analyzed national ARPA fund appropriations since 2021, and in a January report says that many have used the funds “constructively” toward economic recovery but it also suggests that states need to use the remaining funds to help the people most affected by the pandemic and prevent long-term damage to health, education, and social services in states.
According to the CBPP’s data, capital construction made up 21% of the allocations – the largest share for all states – through December, with some states like Montana allocating 79% of their funds to capital construction projects.
And while many state projects were for broadband and water and sewer infrastructure, some of the spending was unrelated to “an equitable recovery,” according to CBPP policy analyst Iris Hinh, author of the report.
In 2021, Alabama allocated $400 million, almost 20% of its funds, toward the construction of two new prisons.
In Arizona, $4.2 million in recovery funds was designated to fund offices for Department of Corrections staff.
In its January letter to the Treasury Department, the ACLU urged the Deputy Inspector General to investigate the use of ARPA funds for jail and prison expansions, saying such construction “does not mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and does not fall under any of the eligible uses of ARPA funds.”
Twenty-three percent of Florida’s funds were allocated to highway construction, according to the CBPP.
Colorado, Louisiana, and North Dakota also spent a large proportion of their funds on transportation construction.
Hinh noted in the report that “while spending on highways may help produce a stronger recovery, it is often poorly targeted to the communities that need help the most.”
Revenue replacement and unemployment assistance
Another big chunk of the relief funds – 13% across the nation – has gone toward replacing revenue losses from the pandemic, as allowed under the federal guidelines.
The CBPP argues that although it makes sense to ensure that services that existed before the pandemic continue, states should use more of the funds to target inequities made worse by the pandemic, such as food becoming even less affordable for many families.
In Wyoming, 58.8% of appropriations of these funds went toward revenue replacement, followed by New York at 57.2% of appropriations and Pennsylvania at 56.8%.
States allocated $23 billion to unemployment insurance trust funds, but only a small portion of that, $929 million, went toward upgrading unemployment insurance and improving access through IT changes and other advancements.
The rest went toward rebuilding those trust funds after jobless claims increased due to the pandemic-related closures of businesses.
Nevada, for instance, which had borrowed from the federal government to pay unemployment claims during the pandemic used ARPA funds to pay off its loan rather than raise the unemployment tax paid by employers, according to the Nevada Current.
But Nevada is also using ARPA funds to modernize and streamline its system which buckled under the influx of claims during 2020, according to the Current.
Colorado, Delaware, New Jersey, South Dakota, Tennessee, Virginia, and Washington are also planning to use ARPA funds to update their systems.
Hinh said that states that are only choosing to rebuild their trust funds are missing out on opportunities to expand access and should instead raise the unemployment taxes paid by businesses.
Tax cuts
One of the more contentious uses of the ARPA funds has been to offset tax cuts.
Since the law was intended to be a stimulus, it included a mandate: States could not cut taxes and then use federal funds to counteract the cuts.
In 2021, 21 state attorneys general, all Republicans, brought legal challenges against that part of the law.
In January, the Supreme Court declined to hear Missouri’s case on the issue after a federal district court said the state didn’t have legal standing and the Court of Appeals for the 8th Circuit agreed.
In a case involving 13 states, including West Virginia, Iowa, Arkansas, and Florida, the Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit ruled in January that the provision was unconstitutional because there wasn’t clear notice for how to comply with the law.
At least 24 states are considering income tax cuts during their current legislative sessions, including Arkansas, Montana, and Utah.
Kentucky Republicans are trying to pass another cut in the personal income tax after the income tax rate already fell this year.
In Kansas, North Dakota, and Ohio, lawmakers are proposing flat tax rates, and political leaders in Arkansas, Indiana, Louisiana, and West Virginia have pushed for getting rid of personal income taxes altogether, according to the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy.
The flat tax proposal in Kansas would slash the budget by $1.5 billion.
These tax policy changes will hurt the people most affected by the pandemic and weaken the impact of the recovery funds, said Hinh and Aidan Davis, state policy director with the Institute on Taxation and and Economic Policy.
“It’s during good times in the economy when states are flush with cash that they feel that they are most able to justify and to push for deep tax cuts,” Davis said.
“I do think that they feel that they’ve been able to use that almost as a cover for something that they wanted to do year after year and they continue to push for year after year, but (they’re) not talking about what the long-term implications are, because you’re looking at a one time surplus.”
She added, “It really is a missed opportunity on a lot of fronts because with the legislation under ARPA, the state aid did a lot of good, but it could have done a lot more had much of it not been squandered on tax cuts in the state.”
Hinh said that in the long term, states can either build off of the benefits of the recovery funds or suffer long-term consequences from cutting taxes.
“From the Great Recession, there were tax cuts that states implemented and I think, in many cases, that they still haven’t recovered from, and that impacts your education systems, your health care, and things that are really critical to the well-being of families and communities,” she said.
“While things like infrastructure improvements are great and needed, and water, sewer, and broadband, it’s also important to think about the long-term consequences, and that can’t be cutting taxes.
It needs to be continuously building off of these funds and the programs and services they’ve been providing to people because the pandemic will have very lasting impacts and there are so many opportunities, still, with these funds.”
New Hampshire Bulletin reporters Ethan DeWitt and Annmarie Timmins contributed to this report.
New Hampshire Bulletin is part of States Newsroom, a network of news bureaus supported by grants and a coalition of donors as a 501c(3) public charity.
New Hampshire Bulletin maintains editorial independence.
Contact Editor Dana Wormald for questions: info@newhampshirebulletin.com.
Follow New Hampshire Bulletin on Facebook and Twitter.
With the school year underway, safety is top of mind for parents and teachers.
Here infectious diseases expert James Lawler, MD, MPH, summarizes the most recent findings of COVID-19 variants.
Dr. Lawler is an infectious disease physician and one of the co-executive directors of the Global Center for Health Security at University of Nebraska Medical Center.
For more detailed information, watch Dr. Lawler explain the latest developments each Tuesday in COVID-19 video updates.
The highlights:
BA.5 is the most transmissible variant to date
School-age children are the most likely of all age groups to get infected by COVID-19 – and spread it to others
The latest variants are causing more reinfections than ever before
What variant are we on?
As of this writing in August, BA.5 is the dominant variant.
BA.5 is even more transmissible than previous variants.
BA.5 makes up 88.8% of COVID-19 cases in the U.S.
The second most common variant is BA.4, with 5.3% of national cases.
You're best protected when you stay up to date
Schedule your Schedule your COVID-19 booster to get the best protection from variants like BA.5.
Are variants becoming more mild?
A highly contagious variant – like omicron and now BA.5 – will drive large numbers of cases.
If more people get infected with a more contagious variant, hospitalizations still increase.
"We are seeing lower proportions of cases ending up in the hospital in the last several months.
However, most of the difference in hospitalizations and death rates is due to immunity – mostly from vaccination, but partly from previous infection," says Dr. Lawler.
"Even if a variant seems mild on an individual level, when you have high rates of infection in the community you will still end up with a large number of folks severely ill in the hospital.
"
"Your protection from the vaccine depends quite a bit on how recent your last vaccine dose was," says Dr. Lawler.
"We're still seeing good protective effect against hospitalization if you're up to date," says Dr. Lawler.
That means if you're eligible for a COVID-19 booster, get one.
With newer variants, vaccine effectiveness seems to go down.
And data shows if you're three, four, or five months out from your last dose of vaccine, your vaccine effectiveness is much lower.
Can you get COVID-19 twice?
And which COVID-19 variants are more likely to reinfect?
Yes, it's not uncommon to get COVID-19 more than once.
This is especially true if you're unvaccinated.
The highest percentage of reinfections are happening now, during the BA.5 wave.
You can see from the chart that reinfections are happening more frequently.
"As new variants emerge, prior infection is having less and less of an impact on whether you'll be protected from COVID-19," explains Dr. Lawler.
But vaccines appear to be protecting on a population level.
Data shows that age groups more likely to have received two or three vaccine doses have lower rates of reinfections than groups who have not.
Reinfections are more common in U.K. school-age children, ages 5 to 14.
More reinfections are happening currently with BA.5 (August 2022) than ever before.
Source: @JusDayDa
"If you look at earlier variants – like ancestral COVID-19, alpha, or delta – infection with a prior variant seemed to provide pretty good protection against reinfection," says Dr. Lawler.
The reinfection rate with omicron was higher, and that rate increased with BA.2 and now BA.5.
Reinfections are highest in school-age kids.
In kids ages 5 to 15, about 45% of the cases in that age group are reinfections in the U.K.
"Whatever the next variant is going to be, it looks like our reinfection rates are going to be much higher, particularly in children," says Dr. Lawler.
"The key to preventing this is to get as many people up to date with their vaccines as possible.
The second thing is to make interventions that reduce community transmission, focusing on schools and young people.
"
Protect your child from COVID-19
Schedule a Schedule a vaccine appointment for your child.
What to expect as school starts
"At this point, almost everybody ages 0 to 17 has been infected at least once," says Dr. Lawler.
About 80% of children show evidence of past COVID-19 infection based upon antibody testing, also known as seroprevalence.
Once you consider a proportion of children who never developed antibodies from their infection or have antibody levels fade to an undetectable level over time, these data suggest that almost all US children have had COVID-19 at some time.
If nearly all kids have been infected, does that mean we have a "wall of immunity"?
Will COVID-19 not be an issue this coming school year?
No.
Even though nearly all children have been infected before, they are still getting COVID-19 and going to the hospital at high rates.
The second highest wave of COVID-19 hospitalizations in children is happening now.
"The fact is, in younger populations we're seeing more hospitalizations now than we've seen in any other wave except omicron," says Dr. Lawler.
So why are so many children in the hospital for COVID-19?
Typically, it's the young people that drive transmission in the community.
"Children are more prone to getting infected and more prone to spreading infection to others," says Dr. Lawler.
"Kids and school-age children are much less likely to be tested, even if they have symptoms," says Dr. Lawler.
When kids get infected, vaccination keeps them out of the hospital.
When omicron dominated, COVID-19 hospitalizations in unvaccinated children were twice as high as in vaccinated children.
Many experts think that vaccines may also reduce the chances of developing long COVID.
A recent analysis of multiple studies concluded that roughly 25% of children go on to develop some symptoms of long COVID after infection.
When omicron dominated, COVID-19 hospitalizations in unvaccinated children were twice as high as vaccinated children.
Source: CDC MMWR
Booster now or booster in the fall?
Some may be waiting for the omicron-specific boosters, expected this fall.
But it makes more sense to get a booster now, especially because Nebraska currently has high levels of transmission.
"Getting that protection now is meaningful.
We don't have a guarantee of when these BA.5-specific vaccines will come out and who will be eligible," says Dr. Lawler.
For example, there may be only enough bivalent (Wuhan + BA.5 strains) vaccines at first for those who are at higher risk, like people age 65 and up.
What does up to date mean?
Up to date means you've had all COVID-19 vaccines and boosters that you're eligible for.
Everyone ages 5 years and older should get a booster after their primary series.
Second boosters are recommended for:
Adults age 50 and older
Some people who are immunocompromised, usually ages 12 and older
Find out when to get a booster from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's interactive tool, based on your age and which primary series you had.
Will COVID get worse or better?
"As the current BA.5 wave continues in the U.S. we can expect an increasing number of hospitalizations and deaths in the U.S.," says Dr. Lawler.
"Unfortunately, we are far from exiting the pandemic.
"
BA.5 is more transmissible than previous variants
Our rates of boosters (third doses) are lower compared to the rest of the world, meaning we are less protected
Many U.S. children have not been vaccinated for COVID-19, and reinfections are highest in school-age children
We have far fewer Americans who have had a dose of COVID-19 vaccine in the last 6 months than we did going into last fall.
We may be more vulnerable than we were a year ago
See Dr. Lawler explain why cases and deaths will likely increase this fall.
4 back to school safety tips
New UCLA research reveals that the U.S. has substantially higher death rates at all but the oldest age groups than five similarly high-income European countries.
The study, conducted by UCLA sociologist Patrick Heuveline, also found that the gap between the U.S. and the five other nations — England and Wales, France, Germany, Italy and Spain — widened during the first two years of the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, the study reveals, only a portion of that phenomenon was directly attributable to COVID-19.
Heuveline found that between 2019 and 2021 in the U.S., the annual number of excess deaths — meaning the difference between the actual number of deaths and the number that would have been expected under normal condtions — nearly doubled.
But his research concluded that 45% of that rise was due to causes other than COVID-19.
The findings were published today in the open-access journal PLOS One.
“The mortality gap widened during the pandemic, but not just due to the U.S. handling of the crisis mortality from COVID-19,” Heuveline said.
“The chronic toll of excess deaths due to causes other than COVID-19 continued to increase as well, further demonstrating the U.S. health policy failure to integrate the social, psychological and economic dimensions of health, from a weak social security net and lack of health care access for all to poor health behaviors.”
Calculating excess death rates can be useful for comparing mortality between different countries or subpopulations, as well as before and after the onset of a health crisis.
Previous studies have documented a substantial widening of the mortality gap between the U.S. and the five European countries between 2000 and 2017.
And mounting evidence suggests that the U.S. experienced even higher mortality from COVID-19 than the other countries.
Building on those earlier studies, Heuveline calculated excess death rates in the U.S. and the five other countries for 2017 through 2021.
His calculations account for different population sizes between the countries.
The study found that the number of excess deaths between the U.S. and the five European countries did indeed increase between 2017 and 2021, and that COVID-19 mortality contributed to the increase — but perhaps to a smaller degree than might have been expected.
In 2021, for example, 25% of all excess deaths in the U.S. were attributed to COVID-19, representing 223,266 deaths out of 892,491 total excess deaths from any cause.
Further research will be needed to identify specific underlying reasons for how, exactly, the COVID-19 pandemic contributed to the widening gap in excess deaths between the U.S. and the other five nations.
For instance, Heuveline said, additional studies could explore differences in vaccination rates or social conditions that place a disproportionate impact on minority populations.
An extensive review by NYU Langone researchers of the largest contact tracing program in U.S. history found that the program’s rollout during the COVID-19 pandemic was remarkably effective, but it also identified areas that could be improved in similar situations in the future.
From June 1, 2020, to December 31, 2021, a research team in the Department of Population Health at NYU Langone evaluated the city’s tracing efforts—specifically NYC Health + Hospitals’ Test and Trace program.
Test and Trace, also known as T2, was done in partnership with the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, multiple other city agencies, and many community partners.
The joint team found that the massive effort, which mobilized thousands of workers, succeeded in its goals of intensive community engagement, equitable rollout of testing services across neighborhoods, and remarkable timeliness for case notification.
The researchers also found room for improvement in future readiness, including strong gaps in the supply chain for testing supplies and a need for more capacity in mobile testing and more-streamlined data collection.
At the outset of the pandemic, New York City was the epicenter of transmission in the United States.
Between March and May 2020, more than 200,000 cases of COVID-19 were confirmed in New York City, but due to lack of testing, the total number of cases during the pandemic’s initial wave remains unknown.
Mortality rates were high, with more than 32 percent of hospitalized patients dying from the virus.
To lessen community spread of COVID-19, a disease with no effective treatments or vaccine at the time, public health leadership in New York City rapidly worked to begin identifying people who had been exposed to someone infected with SARS-CoV-2, the pandemic virus.
Rapid Deployment
By June 1, 2020, three months into the pandemic, NYC Health + Hospitals (H+H) had mobilized thousands of workers and launched the T2 program, the evaluation found.
The tracing program’s goals were to identify and isolate cases by providing city residents with free COVID-19 testing at as many accessible locations across the city as possible, to reduce transmission through rapid case notification and contact tracing, and to provide resources to residents in need of support during isolation and quarantine periods.
“As perhaps the largest program of its kind across the country, New York City’s Test and Trace program was created and scaled in record time,” said the evaluation team’s leader, Lorna E. Thorpe, PhD, MPH, who also serves as director of the Division of Epidemiology in the Department of Population Health at NYU Grossman School of Medicine.
“Our evaluation team identified many strengths and successes in the rapid formation and scaling of the T2 program, but also identified improvements that should be considered, including the improvement of working conditions for employees hired through contractors.”
Reach, Equity, and Timeliness
After an extensive, 18-month evaluation of the T2 program, Dr. Thorpe and other leaders in the Department of Population Health—Carolyn Berry, PhD; Anna Bershteyn, PhD; and Nadia S. Islam, PhD—published their findings in a report.
They observed the following:
The T2 program placed a strong emphasis on community engagement by ensuring all frontline staff hired were New York City residents, and in particular were from neighborhoods hardest hit by the virus.
The program also included more than 50 community-based organizations across all boroughs to help ensure that the program was implemented as equitably as possible.
H+H rapidly became the largest provider of SARS-CoV-2 testing services in New York through contracts with third-party labs and testing vendors, as well as through new hiring.
By introducing mobile testing, the T2 program was able to reach diverse communities and ensure that most city residents did not have to travel far for testing.
H+H performed approximately 25 percent of all testing in the city during the evaluation period.
Throughout the evaluation period, 1.45 million COVID cases were reported to the T2 program.
Before the Omicron wave of the virus, which arrived mid-November 2021, T2 staff had made contact with 89 percent of all reported cases, within a median of 2 days for case notification.
A total of 78 percent of all cases completed interviews.
There were no disparities in case completions across demographic groups or neighborhoods.
The Omicron wave of the virus dramatically impacted the reach of the T2 program.
The dramatic surge of cases between mid-November 2021 and January 2022 exceeded the program’s capacity.
The number of cases who were reached and interviewed by T2 workers fell by more than 40 percent, and just over half of the cases reached provided information on recent contacts who may have been exposed to the virus.
The evaluators found that T2 workers were more successful in reaching contacts with positive test results than in tracing exposed contacts of cases.
Only 59 percent of contacts were successfully reached, and in those cases the T2 program often learned about contacts outside of the 10-day monitoring period for COVID symptoms.
Evaluators also noted that performance in contact tracing fell during variant wave surges in infection.
A suite of the essential services provided by the T2 program, known as Take Care services, helped support cases and contacts in their homes during the isolation and quarantine periods.
Early in the pandemic, H+H managed over 1,200 hotel rooms, and in cooperation with community-based organizations, Take Care met community needs that included food delivery, at-home care packages, dog-walking services, and cash assistance.
Evaluators found that 1.1 percent of all the cases and contacts who interacted with T2 were housed in hotel rooms.
Case notification rates were higher in neighborhoods with majority-Black or majority-Hispanic populations, compared to neighborhoods with fewer residents belonging to that race or ethnicity.
The exception was in neighborhoods with high concentrations of public housing, where case completion rates were lower—suggesting that increased efforts are needed to partner with public housing–facing community organizations to build trust and bolster community engagement.
Challenges and Lessons Learned from T2 implementation
Supervisors and staff interviewed by the evaluation team identified a number of challenges.
While the program tried to keep staff working in their own communities, this did not always happen.
Some staff were asked to travel to other parts of the city, and language barriers between staff were reported, particularly during telephone handoffs involving crucial information about cases and contacts.
T2 contact tracing staff also cited lengthy telephone scripts and lack of flexibility in being able to reduce the volume of calls to families—even upon request by call recipients.
One workaround, say the evaluators, could be to automate text messages with push notifications in subsequent communications between T2 staff and cases or contacts.
Some frontline staff and supervisors reported job dissatisfaction due to issues such as inadequate break time, supervisor quality, and other undesirable working conditions.
With respect to Take Care services, evaluators found that social service referrals for basic necessities were requested by 27 percent of cases.
However, only half of the 16 percent of contacts who completed intake forms were successfully connected to a Take Care service.
The evaluators cited this drop to individuals who could not be subsequently reached by T2 staff, or who were reached but declined the service.
According to evaluators, these services had different budgets depending on neighborhood, and they waned over time.
Future planning should include better coordination and standardization of these services across neighborhoods.
To undertake case notification and contact tracing, the T2 program used the Salesforce data platform.
While the data system was originally able to handle large caseloads and surges of infections, T2 staff reported that it became increasingly difficult to make programmatic changes to the data platform as the pandemic rapidly shifted during the Omicron wave and beyond.
Data sharing across relevant agencies was also a major challenge at times due to differences in regulatory clearances.
Another barrier during the COVID-19 pandemic was a breakdown in trust among numerous institutions, including government, the media, and the pharmaceutical and healthcare industries.
To build trust, Dr. Thorpe and colleagues recommend that future contact tracing initiatives build capacity to address misinformation through education and communications campaigns that dispel medical misinformation and myths before they become entrenched in communities.
In addition to Dr. Thorpe, Dr. Berry, Dr. Bershteyn, and Dr. Islam, co-investigators include Marie Bragg, PhD; Margaret Paul; Marc N. Gourevitch, MD, MPH; Kelly M. Doran, MD; Andrea Titus, PhD; Samrachana Adhikari, PhD; Brian D. Elbel, MD, PhD; Chau Trinh-Shevrin, DrPH; and Joseph E. Ravenell, MD.
Core staff included Rachel Masser, MPH; Stefanie Bendik, MPH; Sarah Conderino, DrPH; Michelle Chau, PhD, MPH; Rita Larson, MPH; Andrew Fair, MS; Chuan Hong, PhD; and Lorraine Kwok.
Media Inquiries
Sasha Walek
Phone: 917-838-9607
sasha.walek@nyulangone.org
Many American adults who were hospitalized for COVID-19 experienced lingering symptoms, physical limitations and financial problems six months after being discharged, according to a new study.
The study, which was funded in part by the National Institutes of Health and published Tuesday in the journal JAMA Network Open, looked at more than 800 adults who were hospitalized for COVID-19 between August 2020 and July 2021.
It found that at the six-month mark, more than 7 in 10 participants reported problems affecting the heart or lungs like coughing, rapid or irregular heartbeat and breathlessness.
More than half of survivors reported fatigue after half a year.
Notably, rates of heart and lung problems and fatigue increased from one month to six months after hospital discharge, highlighting that new symptoms can develop even after the initial COVID-19 illness is over.
“My clinic patients often want to know how soon they’ll get back to their usual health,” study author Andrew Admon, a pulmonologist at Lieutenant Colonel Charles S. Kettles VA Medical Center, said in a statement.
“Based on these data, it seems that many people hospitalized for COVID-19 should expect symptoms to last for up to six months or even longer.”
Rates of reported financial problems and physical limitations decreased from the one-month mark to six months after hospitalization but remained high, according to the study.
More than 56% of study participants reported financial problems after half a year and 47% reported limitations in their daily activities.
The financial problems reported by study participants were significant, with nearly 35% reportedly using up all or most of their savings by month six and 20% saying they were unable to pay for necessities.
More than 16% said they had been contacted by a collection agency as a result of their COVID-19 hospitalization.
Financial problems were reported more often among minority populations.
“Collectively, these results suggest that many survivors of COVID-19 infection continue to experience symptoms for at least 6 months after hospitalization, recovery under current care is limited, and disparities may exist in some problems after COVID-19 hospitalization,” researchers wrote in the study.
As the pandemic continues, millions of people in the U.S. are facing long COVID, a complex, poorly understood chronic illness with symptoms that can linger for months or even years after a patient gets COVID-19.
But a Duke researcher has identified the reason behind one of the chronic symptoms of long COVID — a perpetual loss of smell.
According to Bradley Goldstein, an associate professor of head and neck surgery & communication sciences, the necessity for this study, which was published in Science Translational Medicine, arose as patients recovering from viral symptoms endured a prolonged loss of smell.
To uncover the mechanisms behind prolonged loss of smell, researchers analyzed biopsies of the tissue inside the nasal cavity lining of subjects with a loss of smell, as well as subjects with a normal sense of smell.
They did this using single cell RNA-sequencing, which Goldstein described as “a way to, at a cell by cell level, profile exactly what each cell is doing in terms of its gene expression and activity.”
According to Goldstein, the research team found that there was unresolved inflammation in the olfactory lining.
“Specifically, we’re seeing some types of immune cells that aren’t normally present in the controls …
And we think that those immune cells, specifically T cells, and macrophages, are very likely causing some problems,” he said.
Goldstein said that when someone's sense of smell is damaged, people realize how important smell is to their daily lives.
“We're constantly getting information through our olfactory system about the world around us,” he said.
Not only does the olfactory system facilitate the sense of smell, but it also affects memory and emotion due to how olfactory input is wired to the brain, according to Goldstein.
“If all of a sudden, that entire sensory modality is just shut off, people really find that disconcerting,” he said.
But identifying the reason is just the first step.
“There’s really not a lot that we have to offer to help people recover their sense of smell right now.
We certainly don't have any specific drugs that have been designed to target exactly this problem and help correct it.
So I think that that's definitely an unmet need,” Goldstein said.
Because olfactory neurons are exposed in the nasal lining, these drugs can potentially be topical.
“That might allow us to overcome limitations … so you don't necessarily have to take something systemically as a pill or a shot,” he added.
The next steps in this research include expanding the sample size and utilizing the information gleaned from the study to develop long-term treatments.
Get The Chronicle straight to your inbox Signup for our weekly newsletter.
Cancel at any time.
Email Address
ON JANUARY 9th 2022, 109 container ships sat off the coast of California waiting for their turn to unload at the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach.
One year later there are almost none.
The easing of port traffic and the opening of other supply-chain bottlenecks have led to a collapse in freight rates from the all-time highs reached during the pandemic.
The cost of shipping a 40-foot container from China to America’s west coast is now $1,400, down 93% from its peak of $20,600 in September 2021, according to Freightos, an online freight marketplace.
It is roughly equal to its value in February 2020, before the pandemic struck.
Costs along other major shipping routes are in retreat, too.
That ought to be a relief for consumers.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York estimates that 40% of inflation between 2019 and 2021 was caused by supply shocks.
A mammalian protein previously shown by UT Southwestern microbiologists to inhibit the virus that causes COVID-19 in cell culture also protected live mouse models, significantly limiting infection in the lung cells and diminishing the symptoms.
The findings, published in Nature Microbiology, could lead to new strategies to treat COVID-19, which still infects thousands and kills hundreds in the U.S. every week.
Our 2020 paper showed that LY6E could inhibit SARS-CoV-2 in cultured cells.
But the proof is showing that it has the same role in living models.
We have demonstrated for the first time that the naturally occurring antiviral protein LY6E reduces COVID-19 illness in a living model."
John Schoggins, Ph.D., Study Senior Author, Associate Professor of Microbiology at UT Southwestern
Human bodies use a variety of strategies to fight viral infections, including producing antiviral proteins, which are the focus of the Schoggins lab.
In 2020, he and colleagues discovered that one of these proteins, LY6E, blocked infection in cell culture against a variety of coronaviruses, including one specific to mice called mouse hepatitis virus (MHV), as well as the viruses responsible for the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak in 2003 and the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) outbreak in 2012.
But how LY6E protects against coronavirus infection and whether it could perform the same feat in COVID-19 animal models was unknown.
To answer these questions, Dr. Schoggins and colleagues used a genetic technique to generate seven live mouse models, each one engineered to turn LY6E off in specific immune cells, in all immune cells, or throughout the body.
Mice missing this protein throughout their bodies or in all of their immune cells typically died of MHV infection.
The mice models also became more vulnerable when the gene was turned off only in immune cells (B cells or monocytes), demonstrating the importance of LY6E in these cells for fighting coronavirus infections.
Mouse models without LY6E but infected with SARS-CoV-2 developed moderate symptoms including weight loss and inflammation and bleeding in their lungs, all signs of illness not seen in models with typical levels of LY6E.
A genetic analysis of the lungs showed that epithelial cells had significant changes in gene expression.
A closer look showed that two subsets of these cells, called club cells and ciliated cells, appeared to take the brunt of infection in models without LY6E. The findings suggest the LY6E produced by these lung epithelial cell types is critical for limiting SARS-CoV-2 infection, said Dr. Schoggins, a Nancy Cain and Jeffrey A. Marcus Scholar in Medical Research, in Honor of Dr. Bill S. Vowell.
In the future, he added, researchers may be able to develop treatments for COVID-19 that depend on delivering extra genes that make LY6E or mimicking its action with a drug.
In addition, mice missing LY6E could be used as more realistic models for SARS-CoV-2 infection to study drugs or vaccines.
Rather than developing a fatal infection as most existing COVID-19 animal models with other genetic alterations do, or no symptoms as mice with normally functioning LY6E do, mice missing LY6E get a mild to moderate COVID-19-like illness that more closely imitates most cases of the disease in humans.
Postdoctoral researcher Katrina Mar, Ph.D., now of the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Institute, led the study.
Other UTSW researchers who contributed were Alexandra I. Wells, Ph.D., Postdoctoral Researcher; Marley C. Caballero Van Dyke, Ph.D., Research Scientist; Jennifer L. Eitson, Senior Research Associate; Natasha W. Hanners, M.D., Assistant Professor of Pediatrics; Bret M. Evers, M.D., Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Pathology and Ophthalmology; and John M. Shelton, Lab Manager.
Judy Woodruff:
A so-called tridemic is threatening to overwhelm health care systems across the country.
It's essentially a triple threat from the combined spread of flu, RSV and COVID, and it's already having a major impact.
More than three-quarters of pediatric hospital beds nationwide are at capacity.
And some states are reporting that more than 90 percent of pediatric beds are occupied.
Seniors are also being hospitalized at a higher rate for respiratory illness.
And hospitalizations from the flu are at a decade-level high.
Dr. Megan Ranney is a practicing emergency room physician.
She's also academic dean at the Brown University School of Public Health.
And she joins me now.
Dr. Ranney, welcome back to the "NewsHour."
Tell us about the caseload at the hospital where you are and hospitals across the country.
Interpretation of results
Our study identifies users who are similar in terms of a wide range of attributes, including prior-anxiety levels, and demonstrates that the ones who share misinformation experience exacerbated anxiety.
Previous research highlights the positive role of prior anxiety in determining the tendency to believe in rumors and further share them30,31,32.
While these studies have found that prior anxiety drives individuals to forage for information, making them susceptible to misinformation, they did not study how exposure to misinformation affects their consequent mental health.
A positive causal effect of sharing misinformation on anxiety, as observed in our work, likely indicates a vicious cycle where highly anxious individuals are more vulnerable to believing and sharing misinformation and \({\text {consequently may experience exacerbated}}\) anxiety by sharing misinformation, thereby increasing their vulnerability towards future misinformation.
The implications of the existence of this vicious cycle are threatening, as it can trigger anxiety disorders in those without an existing psychiatric morbidity13,14 and can even lead to suicidal ideation among those with existing conditions15,16.
More specifically, the existence of this vicious cycle may provide empirical evidence in support of the social amplification theory62, wherein the risks of crises, like the COVID-19 infodemic, are first amplified during the spread of (mis)information, triggering behavior that in turn, leads to further amplification of the risks63,64.
Future investigations can aim to study this cyclic effect of (a) anxiety on exposure to misinformation (as indicated by prior investigations), and (b) exposure to misinformation on anxiety (as indicated by our research), in a single study.
While there have been active discussions on why people share misinformation on social media29,34, it is worth noting that sharing misinformation, albeit conservative, is a strong and robust signal of being exposed to misinformation35,36.
Our study demonstrates that regardless of the underlying cognition or intent behind sharing misinformation, it adversely affects the anxiety of those who share misinformation on social media.
Our findings also pave the way for future research that could explain the psychological reasons or the mechanisms behind the causal relationship between sharing misinformation and experiencing exacerbated anxiety.
Our socio-demographic analysis indicates that women and racial minorities in the U.S. experience more anxiety as a consequence of sharing misinformation than men and whites, respectively.
These results highlight the disparities in experiencing the indirect effect of the pandemic and add to the existing reports and articles that argue how the pandemic has disproportionately impacted women65 and racial minorities66.
We also find that higher education level subdues the effect of sharing misinformation on anxiety, pointing to the potential of pandemic and health literacy initiatives.
This effect of education level on anxiety experienced in response to exposure to misinformation adds to the existing body of research in psychology that indicates that people demonstrating lower cognitive abilities are more affected by false information67, even after being presented with corrected information68.
Theoretical and practical implications
The findings from our study can enable informed decision-making by policy-makers who are responsible for regulating misinformation and monitoring mental health.
The negative impact of misinformation on the anxiety of vulnerable individuals can influence the decisions concerning resource allocation and prioritization while moderating its spread in a setting where fact-checking is severely resource-constrained69,70.
Additionally, agencies responsible for mental well-being can devise strategies to provide timely and proactive care to protected groups in events of frequent exposure to misinformation during an ongoing and protracted crisis like COVID-19.
Beyond the theoretical implications, we believe our methods demonstrate the crucial role that social media data and machine learning techniques can play during global public health emergencies.
Our methods can be used to build tools that could allow social media platforms to assess the relative increase in people’s anxiety post sharing of misinformation and alert them or appropriate mental health caregivers or interventions sufficiently in advance.
The need for such directed interventions is further underscored by the fact that the First Amendment protections in the U.S. present significant challenges for regulatory remedies that aim to moderate the spread of misinformation on social media, via approaches like deplatforming, banning, or content removal, all of which have been major sources of controversy recently71.
As a potential targeted intervention, social media platforms can algorithmically adapt the personalized feeds of at-risk individuals to limit their exposure to misinformation, and in turn, to misinformation sharing and the consequent anxiety.
Some social media corporations have shown increasing commitment to maintaining the “health” of conversations that unfold on their sites, and identify means to promote healthy conversations72.
Our findings can add new evidence to the efforts of social media corporations, potentially augmenting existing efforts and interventions that seek to protect the mental health of vulnerable individuals and subgroups, as well as to realize the vision of Jürgen Habermas’ public sphere online73.
We believe these interventions can work complementary to or in concert with relentless efforts and campaigns of public health organizations encouraging individuals to fact-check pandemic related information before sharing or believing them, such that resulting emotional trauma may be minimized.
While the exact nature of the interventions constitutes ripe areas of future work, they could take the shape of advice and pointers to reduce the duration and frequency of social media consumption, careful selection of authentic and scientific online sources of COVID-19 related information, practicing healthy and alternate coping techniques for stress (e.g. mindfulness), and improvement in lifestyle behaviors such as sleep hygiene and exercise routines.
Limitations and future work
It is also important to be clear about the limitations of this study.
First, we conducted an observational study instead of an RCT.
It is worth noting that even though observational studies offer several complementary advantages over RCTs—for instance, greater statistical power and generalizability40, they cannot account for unobserved confounding.
However, our causal inference framework adopted a matching-based approach that simulated an RCT by controlling as many covariates as possible, reducing the effect of unobserved confounding52.
Second, it can be argued that machine learning classifiers do not infer misinformation and anxiety levels with perfect accuracy and this can lead to accumulation of errors in the overall causal inference framework.
However, automated detection of misinformation and inference of anxiety allows for unobtrusive behavioral sensing of a wider range of subjects than using traditional surveys or questionnaires.
We discuss the methodological gaps that should be considered while deriving proxy signals from social media data to infer elements of mental health, such as anxiety of individuals, in Supplementary Information, Sect. 7.2.
Third, we note that an automated way to gauge demographic attributes in shared content is considered an ethically thorny issue74 as it might call upon negative impacts such as social discrimination and rejection, or even exacerbate some of the very stressors considered here, such as anxiety, that are detrimental to well-being.
We caution that our findings are not suitable to be and should not be adopted as a standalone mechanism to connect anxious social media users holding specific racial or gender identities with mental health care.
Instead, due to a reliance on automatically inferred socio-demographics, our findings are best used as part of an ecology of evidence-based approaches to address the harms of online misinformation.
Further, for our socio-demographic analysis, we considered only binary sex (men/women) and only the four major races in the U.S. (white, Black, Asian Pacific Islander, and Hispanic).
Importantly, the state-of-the-art demographic inference methods that we adopted for our analysis exclude certain marginalized communities or even erase certain identities, for instance, LGBTQ+ or mixed race identities.
While the current study highlights the disparities among certain demographic groups, we believe that our analysis will need to be extended to include additional minority identities in the future and we advocate the use of an intersectional approach75 to tackling the mental health challenges of online misinformation.
We elaborate on these limitations in Supplementary Information, Sect. 7.
In future research, we intend to expand beyond sharing as the type of exposure signal that we consider to include weaker exposure signals such as ‘liking’ a misinformative post or commenting on it.
Such exposure signals should be contextualized appropriately—for instance, the act of commenting cannot be isolated from what the comment is about; whether it favors, counters, or is neutral to the misinformative post.
It may be valuable to categorize misinformation into various types such as health-related and conspiratorial political misinformation, to understand how exposures to different types of misinformation affect anxiety.
Additionally, we also intend to expand our study to understand the impact of exposure to misinformation on other mental health indicators beyond anxiety, like depression and stress.
Also: CDC no longer recommends quarantine for individuals exposed to COVID-19 unless they test positive on day 5
Quick Summary:
Individuals who perform any at-home COVID-19 antigen test and obtain a negative result should repeat the test in 48 hours to reduce the risk of false negative results, the FDA has advised.
Also, the CDC updated its recommendations for COVID-19 quarantining.
Among other updates, quarantining is no longer automatically recommended for individuals who were exposed to COVID-19; instead, those individuals should wear a high-quality mask, get tested for COVID-19 on day 5 and quarantine if they test positive.
Two significant updates on COVID-19 quarantining and at-home testing have occurred in the last week with potential impact on dental practices and staff.
First, individuals who perform any at-home COVID-19 antigen test and obtain a negative result should repeat the test in 48 hours to reduce the risk of false negative results, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration advised.
COVID-19 antigen tests include the free rapid tests Americans were able to order free of charge from the federal government beginning last spring.
The FDA’s safety alert advises that individuals who had a close-contact exposure repeat the test following a negative result “whether or not you have COVID-19 symptoms.”
Second, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention updated its recommendations for COVID-19 quarantining.
Among the changes applying to community settings, quarantining is no longer recommended for individuals who were exposed to COVID-19; instead, those individuals should wear a high-quality mask and get tested for COVID-19 on day 5.
The CDC states that in the coming weeks it plans to align guidance for specific settings like health care, congregate settings at higher risk of transmission and travel, with the Aug. 11 update.
The California Department of Public Health is expected to update its guidance to align with the CDC guidance.
Retesting to reduce the risk of a false negative
The FDA’s recommendation for repeat at-home antigen testing was based on the results of a recent study showing that for people infected with the omicron variant, repeat testing after a negative at-home test result increases the chance of an accurate result.
Because the antigen tests are less accurate than molecular tests, they are less accurate at detecting the virus early in infection — soon after an individual’s exposure.
This is another reason for the FDA’s recommended repeat testing.
Individuals who are experiencing COVID-19 symptoms or had a close-contact exposure with someone who has COVID-19 should follow the FDA’s repeat testing recommendation if their first at-home antigen test result is negative.
The FDA recommends retesting 48 hours after the first negative test.
“You do not need to use the same brand of test each time for repeat testing,” the FDA safety advisory states.
Quarantine no longer recommended for individuals with COVID-19 exposure
The CDC on Aug. 11 updated its COVID-19 guidance for community settings noting the increased number of tools for reducing the severity of COVID-19 illness and the “significantly less risk of severe illness, hospitalization and death compared to earlier in the pandemic.”
The most significant updates include:
Individuals who were exposed to COVID-19 do not need to quarantine after exposure, regardless of their vaccination status.
They should instead wear a high-quality mask for 10 days and get tested on day 5.
Individuals who test positive for COVID-19 should stay home for at least five days, isolate from others at home and wear a high-quality mask when being around others at home and in public is unavoidable.
The updated recommendations stress that individuals are most infectious during the first five days of COVID-19 illness.
Individuals who test positive for COVID-19 can end their isolation after day 5 if they are fever-free for 24 hours without the use of medication and either never had symptoms or the symptoms are improving.
These individuals should continue to wear a high-quality mask through day 10 to protect people who are vulnerable to severe illness.
More broadly, the updated guidance continues to encourage people to stay up to date with COVID-19 vaccinations to protect against serious illness, hospitalization and death.
Read the CDC’s news release for all the newest updates on COVID-19 guidance.
Once the CDPH updates its state guidance to align, it will be posted on the quarantine and isolation page.
Small NIH study reveals how immune response triggered by COVID-19 may damage the brain
Findings could give insight into long-term neurological symptoms of COVID-19.
NIH Medical Arts
A study from the National Institutes of Health describes the immune response triggered by COVID-19 infection that damages the brain’s blood vessels and may lead to short- and long-term neurological symptoms.
In a study published in Brain, researchers from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) examined brain changes in nine people who died suddenly after contracting the virus.
The scientists found evidence that antibodies—proteins produced by the immune system in response to viruses and other invaders—are involved in an attack on the cells lining the brain’s blood vessels, leading to inflammation and damage.
Consistent with an earlier study from the group, SARS-CoV-2 was not detected in the patients’ brains, suggesting the virus was not infecting the brain directly.
Understanding how SARS-CoV-2 can trigger brain damage may help inform development of therapies for COVID-19 patients who have lingering neurological symptoms.
“Patients often develop neurological complications with COVID-19, but the underlying pathophysiological process is not well understood,” said Avindra Nath, M.D., clinical director at NINDS and the senior author of the study.
“We had previously shown blood vessel damage and inflammation in patients’ brains at autopsy, but we didn’t understand the cause of the damage.
I think in this paper we’ve gained important insight into the cascade of events.”
Dr. Nath and his team found that antibodies produced in response to COVID-19 may mistakenly target cells crucial to the blood-brain barrier.
Tightly packed endothelial cells help form the blood-brain barrier, which keeps harmful substances from reaching the brain while allowing necessary substances to pass through.
Damage to endothelial cells in blood vessels in the brain can lead to leakage of proteins from the blood.
This causes bleeds and clots in some COVID-19 patients and can increase the risk of stroke.
For the first time, researchers observed deposits of immune complexes—molecules formed when antibodies bind antigens (foreign substances)—on the surface of endothelial cells in the brains of COVID-19 patients.
Such immune complexes can damage tissue by triggering inflammation.
The study builds on their previous research, which found evidence of brain damage caused by thinning and leaky blood vessels.
They suspected that the damage may have been due to the body’s natural inflammatory response to the virus.
To further explore this immune response, Dr. Nath and his team examined brain tissue from a subset of patients in the previous study.
The nine individuals, age 24 to 73, were chosen because they showed signs of blood vessel damage in the brain based on structural brain scans.
The samples were compared to those from 10 controls.
The team looked at neuroinflammation and immune responses using immunohistochemistry, a technique that uses antibodies to identify specific marker proteins in the tissues.
As in their earlier study, researchers found signs of leaky blood vessels, based on the presence of blood proteins that normally do not cross the blood brain barrier.
This suggests that the tight junctions between the endothelial cells in the blood brain barrier are damaged.
Dr. Nath and his colleagues found evidence that damage to endothelial cells was likely due to an immune response—discovering deposits of immune complexes on the surface of the cells.
These observations suggest an antibody-mediated attack that activates endothelial cells.
When endothelial cells are activated, they express proteins called adhesion molecules that cause platelets to stick together.
High levels of adhesion molecules were found in endothelial cells in the samples of brain tissue.
“Activation of the endothelial cells brings platelets that stick to the blood vessel walls, causing clots to form and leakage to occur.
At the same time the tight junctions between the endothelial cells get disrupted causing them to leak,” Dr. Nath explained.
“Once leakage occurs, immune cells such as macrophages may come to repair the damage, setting up inflammation.
This, in turn, causes damage to neurons.”
Researchers found that in areas with damage to the endothelial cells, more than 300 genes showed decreased expression, while six genes were increased.
These genes were associated with oxidative stress, DNA damage, and metabolic dysregulation.
This may provide clues to the molecular basis of neurological symptoms related to COVID-19 and offer potential therapeutic targets.
Together, these findings give insight into the immune response damaging the brain after COVID-19 infection.
But it remains unclear what antigen the immune response is targeting, as the virus itself was not detected in the brain.
It is possible that antibodies against the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein could bind to the ACE2 receptor used by the virus to enter cells.
More research is needed to explore this hypothesis.
The study may also have implications for understanding and treating long-term neurological symptoms after COVID-19, which include headache, fatigue, loss of taste and smell, sleep problems, and “brain fog.”
Had the patients in the study survived, the researchers believe they would likely have developed Long COVID.
“It is quite possible that this same immune response persists in Long COVID patients resulting in neuronal injury,” said Dr. Nath.
“There could be a small indolent immune response that is continuing, which means that immune-modulating therapies might help these patients.
So these findings have very important therapeutic implications.”
The results suggest that treatments designed to prevent the development of the immune complexes observed in the study could be potential therapies for post-COVID neurological symptoms.
This study was supported by the NINDS Division of Intramural Research (NS003130) and K23NS109284, Roy J. Carver Foundation, and the Iowa Neuroscience Institute.
NINDS is the nation’s leading funder of research on the brain and nervous system.
The mission of NINDS is to seek fundamental knowledge about the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease.
About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases.
For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health®
Setting and selection of participants
This study was performed at five EDs within a university-based health system between 3-1-2020 and 7-20-2021.
Study sites included two urban academic EDs (Johns Hopkins Hospital (JHH) and Bayview Medical Center (BMC)) and three suburban community EDs (Howard County General Hospital (HCGH), Suburban Hospital (SH), and Sibley Memorial Hospital (SMH)) with a combined patient volume of 270,000 visits per year.
All adult patients (≥18 years old) designated as PUIs for COVID-19 were included in the study; COVID-19 infection status was not used as an inclusion criterium because ED disposition decisions are often made before infection status is known and because others who have tested negative continue to be treated as PUIs based on elevated clinical suspicion and presumption of a false negative result21.
PUI status was operationally defined as having active isolation orders in the EHR at the time of ED disposition.
Patients who were not under suspicion for COVID-19, including those who underwent asymptomatic testing for SARS-CoV-2, were excluded.
Our retrospective model building cohort (i.e., derivation cohort) was comprised of ED visits that occurred between 3-1-2020 and 11-15-2020 at all five sites.
Models were prospectively validated using data collected between 11-25-2020 and 7-20-2021, with performance measured and reported separately for periods when model-driven CDS was silent (not visible) and available for use by treating ED clinicians.
Methods of measurement
Outcome and predictor data were extracted from the EHR (Epic, Verona, WI).
Candidate predictor variables were identified by comprehensive review of preprint and peer-reviewed literature on COVID-19 and were evaluated by clinicians and data scientists for face validity and collection reliability; variables were incorporated into final models based on univariate assessment of their relationship to outcomes (e.g., descriptive statistics and graphical plots) and their additive value to ML model predictive performance (differences in AUC)22,23,24,25,26,27,28.
The objective was to achieve high predictive performance with a parsimonious ML model that also considered the constraints and reliability of real-time data feeds.
To ensure model output was optimized to the decision we aimed to support, ML prediction time-points were set as the time of first disposition order entry (e.g., discharge or hospitalization orders) for each patient.
Outcome and predictor measures
The primary outcomes predicted were critical care needs and inpatient care needs within 24 and 72 h of ED disposition, respectively.
Outcome definitions were developed by consensus among a committee of attending physicians in emergency medicine (JH and GK), internal medicine (TD and AS), and critical care medicine (DH and RSS).
Criteria for critical care were met if a patient died, was admitted to an intermediate or intensive care unit, or developed cardiovascular or respiratory failure within 24 h of ED disposition.
Cardiovascular failure was defined by hypotension requiring intravenous vasopressor support (dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, phenylephrine or vasopressin).
Respiratory failure was defined by hypoxia or hypercarbia requiring high-flow oxygen (>10 liters/minute), high-flow nasal canula, noninvasive positive pressure ventilation or invasive mechanical ventilation19.
Criteria for inpatient care needs were met if patients exhibited at least moderate cardiovascular dysfunction (systolic blood pressure <80 mmHg, heart rate ≥125 for ≥30 min or any troponin measurement >99th percentile), respiratory dysfunction (respiratory rate ≥24, hypoxia with documented SpO2 <
88% or administration of supplemental oxygen at a rate >2 liters/minute sustained for ≥30 min) or were discharged at initial ED visit and had a return ED visit and hospitalization within 72 h. Prediction horizons (24 h for critical care needs and 72 h for inpatient care needs) were selected to guide decision-making related to disposition and level of care determinations.
Patients discharged without meeting outcome criteria before reaching 24 or 72 h were assumed to be outcome negative.
Data used for prediction were limited to those routinely stored in the EHR during ED care.
To be included in analysis, predictor data had to be recorded and available in the EHR prior to the time of prediction.
Data elements included patient demographics (age, sex), chief complaint(s), active medical problems (identified based on ICD-10 codes), vital signs, routine laboratory results, markers of inflammation (c-reactive protein [CRP], d-dimer, ferritin), SARS-CoV-2 status, and respiratory support requirements.
Predictor data were prepared as categorical variables.
Continuous variables (e.g., lab results, vital signs) were transformed to discrete categories to enable representation of predictor missingness.
The pre-model fit processing for each type of data was performed as follows.
Demographics (age, gender) were input as categories with age grouped in 10-year increments29.
Chief complaint(s) were limited to a structured pick-list (819 complaints) and grouped into clinically meaningful categories as described previously30,31,32,33.
Active medical problems (ICD-10 codes) were grouped as binary features (present vs. not present) for atrial fibrillation, coronary artery disease, cancer, cerebrovascular disease, diabetes, heart failure, hypertension, immunocompromised, kidney disease, liver disease, pregnancy, prior respiratory failure, and smoking.
Vital signs were discretized as normal or gradations of abnormal based on physiology-based criteria34,35.
The latest vital signs recorded prior to ED disposition were included as predictors along with a comparison to the initial triage vitals (prior to ED interventions) to characterize vital trends (e.g., stable, trending normal, trending abnormal).
Laboratory data were characterized as not resulted (0), resulted within the normal range (1) and resulted with relevant gradations of abnormal (e.g., 2–4).
The SARS-CoV-2 status predictor was classified as unknown or SARS-CoV-2 positive.
Respiratory support was categorized as no oxygen, low-flow (≤2 L/min), mid-flow (>2 and <10 L/min) or high-flow (see above) prior to disposition decision19.
The exact form of each predictor variable, including discretization of continuous variables and the treating of missingness, is detailed in Supplementary Table 1.
Model derivation
The retrospective derivation cohort was randomly divided into training (two-thirds) and testing (one-third) datasets.
Separate ensemble-based decision tree learning algorithms (random forest36) were trained to predict each outcome (critical care needs within 24 h, inpatient care needs within 72 h).
During training, the random forest algorithm (number of estimators = 50, minimum leaf size = 10) executed a randomized sampling process to train a set of individual decision trees and aggregated output to produce a single probabilistic prediction for each outcome37.
To maximize opportunity for algorithmic learning, all encounters by PUIs were included in training datasets, including those where patients met criteria for the outcome of interest prior to the point of prediction.
Performance of each model was evaluated in test sets using the subset of patients for whom model-driven decision support was relevant at the point of decision-making.
This subset was termed the ‘decision group’ and was defined separately for each outcome.
For the critical care outcome, the decision group included all patients who had not met any outcome criteria (cardiopulmonary failure or death) prior to the time of ED disposition decision (identified by time of order entry).
For the inpatient care outcome within 72 h, the decision group included patients who did not meet any outcome criteria at the time of ED disposition decision; patients who met pre-specified criteria for cardiopulmonary dysfunction early in their ED visit but whose dysfunction had resolved by the time of ED disposition decision were included in this group.
Patients not belonging to decision groups were excluded from testing datasets.
Multiple model performance measures were applied during model derivation and prospective evaluation.
Receiver operating characteric (ROC) curve analysis was performed, which included measuring the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) with 95% confidence interval estimates calculated using Delong’s method38,39.
Meausurements of COVID-19 Deterioration Risk Level distribution and associated outcome probability were reported.
Overall goodness-of-fit (Brier Score) and calibration curves (plots of observed versus predicted risk) were evaluated40.
Model interpretation was perfomed using feature importance measures including SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) values to assess predictor impact and directionality41.
Model validation
Models underwent prospective validation using a similar approach.
Prospective model performance was measured and reported separately for a cohort of ED visits that occurred while our CDS system operated silently and had no impact on clinical care delivery and for visits that occurred after CDS was made visible to ED clinicians.
As described for the testing dataset of our retrospective cohort, prospective performance was measured and reported for patients belonging to the decision only (those not already meeting outcome criteria at the time of disposition).
Clinical decision support system development
A system to generate patient-level risk estimates and deliver EHR-embedded CDS to emergency clinicians in real-time was developed with software engineers and end-users under a human-centered design framework.
ML models were triggered to generate new outcome risk estimates each time new predictor data (e.g., vital signs, laboratory results) were filed to the EHR.
To facilitate rapid interpretation at the point-of-care, model-generated outcome probabilities were translated to one of ten COVID-19 Deterioration Risk Levels using risk thresholding; thresholds were determined by consensus between technical and clinical team members using graphical plots, calibration curves, and outcome frequency tables.
Thresholds were designed based on the objective to distribute COVID-19 Deterioration Risk Levels over a 1 (low risk) to 10 (high risk) scale using the observed probability of each outcome.
Brief non-interruptive CDS that contained risk levels was populated within existing EHR workflow (i.e., disposition module) for eligible patients only, with more elaborate CDS made available via an EHR-embedded hyperlink.
CDS content and appearance was developed iteratively, guided by direct feedback from prospective end-users.
Clinical implementation and ongoing quality assurance
Our CDS system was activated to operate silently, suppressed from ED clinician view, beginning on 11-25-2020.
COVID-19 Deterioration Risk Levels and associated CDS became viewable in each participating ED serially between 12-8-2020 and 2-23-2021 (JHH 12-8-2020; BMC 12-22-2020; HCGH 1-13-2021;
SH 2-17-2021; SMH 2-23-2021) and remained viewable until 7-20-2021.
Prospective model performance, patient distribution across risk levels and patient-oriented outcomes including rates of hospital admission, ICU admission (direct and secondary due to escalation of care within 24 h), 24-h mortality and 72-h ED return for discharged patients were monitored regularly during the pre- and post-implementation periods.
CDS performance and patient outcome reports were made available to clinical and hospital IT leadership teams at each site.
All measures were reported separately for silent and visible periods.
Before CDS was made viewable, all ED clinicians at each site received live training on the purpose and function of the system by an ED clinician study team member (JH or AM).
They were also provided recorded materials for asynchronous study and review via email and EHR-embedded hyperlinks.
Training sessions included detailed explanations of ML model function (outcomes, predictors and algorithmic processing), model performance, and emphasis of the continued importance of clinician judgement in individual patient assessment.
Data infrastructure, ML prediction models and CDS software were developed and evaluated under the approval of the Johns Hopkins Medicine Institutional Review Board (IRB00185078).
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Our immune system is a pretty powerful tool capable of fighting off everyday infections.
But sometimes, when faced with more severe illnesses like cancer, our immune system could use an additional boost.
One such boost comes in the form of lab-made monoclonal antibodies.
Advertisement Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center.
Advertising on our site helps support our mission.
We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Infections disease specialist Tricia Bravo, MD, breaks down this very scientific-sounding term and explains how monoclonal antibodies were used earlier in the pandemic to prevent severe COVID-19 infections in people who were at higher risk for serious illness.
What are monoclonal antibodies?
When you’re exposed to an infection, your body makes specific proteins called antibodies that are designed to fight off that infection.
When you no longer have that infection, your body continues to produce some of those antibodies in case the infection returns.
“Antibodies are basically proteins that your body makes to fight a specific infection,” explains Dr. Bravo.
Monoclonal antibodies are lab-made antibodies that mimic what your natural antibodies are able to do, but they tend to work faster with more immediate results.
Monoclonal antibodies are most often used as a form of targeted therapy for specific kinds of cancer, but they’ve also been used throughout the pandemic to help fight off COVID-19.
“It’s very specific ammunition to fight particular infectious organisms,” Dr. Bravo adds.
How are monoclonal antibodies used to treat COVID-19?
Neutralizing monoclonal antibodies are no longer used to treat COVID-19 in the U.S. because they’re not as effective against currently circulating omicron subvariants.
Currently in the U.S., the main treatment options that target COVID-19 directly are these antiviral medications:
These are available for people with mild to moderate COVID-19 infection who are at high risk for progressing to severe infection.
Remdesivir is also a recommended treatment strategy in conjunction with steroids for certain people who are hospitalized with severe illness.
Earlier in the pandemic, monoclonal antibodies like Evusheld™ (tixagevimab and cilgavimab) were once used as a preventive measure against COVID-19.
These neutralizing monoclonal antibodies have a different mechanism of action from antivirals.
“That means neutralizing monoclonal antibodies work differently from antiviral medications by attaching to the spike protein on the surface of the COVID-19 virus and preventing it from infecting your cells,” explains Dr. Bravo.
“Antiviral medications, on the other hand, stop the virus from making copies of itself and reduces the spread of infection.”
Now, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has withdrawn emergency use authorization for monoclonal antibodies that have been previously used as treatment.
The monoclonal antibodies that are no longer authorized in the U.S. (but may be authorized in other areas outside of the U.S.) include:
Advertisement
Other monoclonal antibodies, like Actemra® (tocilizumab), are only used as treatment in the U.S. for people who are hospitalized with severe COVID-19 infection who meet the following criteria:
Age 2 and older.
Have tested positive for COVID-19.
Have been hospitalized.
Receiving systemic corticosteroids.
Receiving supplemental oxygen.
This medication doesn’t target the coronavirus directly, but it’s an anti-inflammatory that stops your immune system from becoming overreactive to the virus.
This medication has also been used to treat other inflammatory conditions like rheumatoid arthritis.
Advertisement
The recommendations for COVID-19 treatments and the use of monoclonal antibodies changes often to meet the demand of up-and-coming variants.
For the most up-to-date information, the FDA offers a list of treatments that have been given emergency use authorization (EUA) for treating COVID-19.
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) continues to update its guidelines with new effective treatments, alongside a list of old treatments that have become ineffective.
And for people outside of the U.S., the World Health Organization (WHO) offers its own set of guidelines on which treatments are recommended.
How are monoclonal antibodies given?
Monoclonal antibodies are only given through an IV or as a subcutaneous injection (a shot).
That means, in order to receive them, you need to be seen in a medical setting, which limits the overall availability of the treatment.
When used as a treatment for COVID-19, Actemra is given through a single 60-minute IV infusion.
Monoclonal antibodies vs. vaccines
Don’t think of monoclonal antibodies as an alternative to the COVID-19 vaccine.
Dr. Bravo stresses that getting vaccinated is still your body’s single best protection against contracting severe COVID-19.
That’s true even if you’re immunocompromised.
“I can’t emphasize enough the importance of vaccines,” she says.
“They offer a much better kind of protection and a much more lasting protection than you can get with monoclonal antibodies.”
Pfizer will charge $110 to $130 for a dose of its COVID-19 vaccine once the U.S. government stops buying the shots, but the drugmaker says it expects many people will continue receiving it for free.
Pfizer executives said the commercial pricing for adult doses could start early next year, depending on when the government phases out its program of buying and distributing the shots.
The drugmaker said it expects that people with private health insurance or coverage through public programs like Medicare or Medicaid will pay nothing.
The Affordable Care Act requires insurers to cover many recommended vaccines without charging any out-of-pocket expenses.
A spokesman said the company also has an income-based assistance program that helps eligible U.S. residents with no insurance get the shots.
The price would make the two-dose vaccine more expensive for cash-paying customers than annual flu shots.
Those can range in price from around $50 to $95, depending on the type, according to CVS Health, which runs one of the nation’s biggest drugstore chains.
A Pfizer executive said Thursday that the price reflects increased costs for switching to single-dose vials and commercial distribution.
The executive, Angela Lukin, said the price was well below the thresholds “for what would be considered a highly effective vaccine.”
The drugmaker said last year that it was charging the U.S. $19.50 per dose, and that it had three tiers of pricing globally, depending on each country’s financial situation.
In June, the company said the U.S. government would buy an additional 105 million doses in a deal that amounted to roughly $30 per shot.
The government has the option to purchase more doses after that.
Pfizer’s two-shot vaccine debuted in late 2020 and has been the most common preventive shot used to fight COVID-19 in the U.S.
More than 375 million doses of the original vaccine, which Pfizer developed with the German drugmaker BioNTech, have been distributed in the U.S., according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
That doesn’t count another 12 million doses of an updated booster that was approved earlier this year.
The vaccine brought in $36.78 billion in revenue last year for Pfizer and was the drugmaker’s top-selling product.
Analysts predict that it will rack up another $32 billion this year, according to FactSet.
But they also expect sales to fall rapidly after that.
More than 90% of the adult U.S. population has already received at least one dose of COVID-19 vaccine, according to the CDC.
But only about half that population has also received a booster dose.
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education.
The AP is solely responsible for all content.
The health workforce is critical to global health security, but around the world, many health care workers (HCWs) lack even basic protections against infectious disease.
The consequences are dire: HCWs face disproportionate risk of illness and death, exacerbating both the health and economic impacts of an outbreak, including through increased disease transmission and disruptions to essential health care services.
COVID-19 has proven to be no exception.
But despite commitments to increase basic health care worker protections, progress has been limited.
What’s urgently needed are safe facilities and health care worker protections, including systematic tracking of HCW infections and deaths, better infection prevention and control measures, adherence to water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) standards, and comprehensive training, tools and resources for a safer health care workforce.
Protecting health workers benefits the entire society.
Governments need to take leadership and responsibility to invest in the protection of health care workers and establish accountability mechanism to ensure measures are being implemented.
Our most recent analysis of women in healthcare is based on data gathered for the Women in the Workplace 2022 report published by McKinsey and LeanIn.
Org.
In this article, we examine female representation, attrition, promotion rates, and external hiring; the barriers to advancement for women of color; and threats to recent gains (see sidebar, “About the research”).
Representation
Healthcare continues to outpace other industries in the representation of women; however, women (especially women of color) remain underrepresented at senior levels in healthcare organizations (Exhibit 1).
1
About the research This article is based on data collected for the Women in the Workplace 2022 report, published by McKinsey in partnership with LeanIn.
Org.
The data behind this report are based on a survey of 333 companies across the United States and Canada.
The analysis builds on similar research that McKinsey and LeanIn.
Org have conducted annually since 2015, as well as on 2012 research from McKinsey.
For the 2022 report, data about pipeline representation were collected from year-end 2021.
These data reflect not only the representation of women and men as of December 31, 2021, but also personnel changes (for example, those resulting from promotion, hiring, and attrition) during 2021.
HR leaders and professionals provided information on policies, programs, and priorities at their companies.
These data sets, representing point-in-time snapshots, reflect the responses of companies and the experiences of employees when the survey was conducted.
Visit womenintheworkplace.com to see the healthcare organizations that have agreed to publicly share that they have participated in the healthcare benchmark.
Increased representation.
Women’s representation in healthcare has increased across all levels compared with last year, with the most marked advancement in senior vice president positions (an increase of up to ten percentage points).
At all levels, women’s representation in healthcare remains higher than in corporate America overall.
The representation of women of color in healthcare is the same or higher at all levels (except for C-suite roles) compared with corporate America.
Lack of representation in senior levels.
Women’s representation in healthcare remains high early in the pipeline, including in entry-level (75 percent), manager (70 percent), and senior manager or director (61 percent) roles, and has risen substantially compared with years past.
But the representation of women drops in each successive career level to a low of 32 percent at the C-suite level.
For example, although 70 percent of managers are women, just 45 percent of vice presidents (two levels higher) are women—a drop-off of 25 percentage points.
Similar to last year, promotion rates, retention, and external hiring have not kept pace to improve representation at more senior management levels.
Lack of diversity, particularly in senior levels.
Women in senior-level roles in healthcare are predominantly White.
For example, only 4 percent of C-suite healthcare executives are women of color.
Similarly, 32 percent of healthcare board members are women; of those, only 8 percent are women of color.
Women of color experience the steepest drop in representation throughout the pipeline.
Representation of women of color drops steadily—and more sharply than overall industry averages—at each successive career step, from entry level (26 percent) to C-suite roles (4 percent).
Attrition
Higher rates of attrition.
Our 2022 data show that women in healthcare are leaving their jobs at higher rates on average than in previous years.
Attrition was especially acute at the entry and C-suite levels (Exhibit 2).
The female attrition rate at the C-suite level more than doubled from the previous year, rising from 6.4 percent to 16.6 percent.
It was also about five percentage points higher than for C-suite men and C-suite women across all industries.
2
Promotions
Lower promotion rates.
Internal promotion rates for women in healthcare are lower than the average for women in all industries at every level.
Men were promoted at higher rates than women into manager, vice president, and senior vice president roles, while women were promoted at higher rates than men into senior manager or director and C-suite roles (Exhibit 3).
Promotion rates for women (and men) decreased at year-end 2021 through the vice president level, compared with the prior two years.
Notably, women were promoted at higher rates to the senior vice president and C-suite levels compared with year-end 2020, although this is still a decrease from the promotion rate for women to C-suite roles at year-end 2019.
3
In healthcare, a broken rung persists at the manager level: only 2.0 percent of men and 1.4 percent of women are promoted to manager roles, compared with 8.3 percent of men and 7.2 percent of women across all other industries.
External hiring
Increased external hiring.
At junior levels, more than half of all external hires in healthcare are women (75 percent of entry-level workers, 66 percent of managers, and 58 percent of senior managers or directors)
(Exhibit 4).
Healthcare companies can keep a critical eye on the ratio of women’s representation at a given level and the share of women hired into that level.
When the share of externally hired women is lower than the share of women currently in that level, as is the case at the manager through SVP levels in the healthcare industry, this runs the risk of being dilutive to women’s representation over time.
4
At senior levels, women make up less than half of external hires in healthcare (42 percent of vice presidents and 41 percent of senior vice presidents).
As with the more junior levels, these hires also run the risk of being dilutive to women’s representation at those levels over time (assuming all other representation flows stay constant).
Women continue to have higher levels of representation, hiring, and advancement in healthcare than in corporate America overall.
Even so, the latest data show that the industry has plenty of room for improvement.
April 8, 2022
The healthcare sector is examining how to better hire and promote women to the highest levels.
Women have long found a path toward advancement in healthcare and life sciences—from Virginia Apgar, who developed a standard in the 1950s to assess newborn health, to Tu Youyou, who earned the Nobel Prize in medicine in 2015 for her discovery of a treatment for malaria.
Women currently account for more than half of all entry-level employees in the sector and have made progress in advancing to management, according to our previous analysis of women in healthcare.
About the research This article is based on data collected for the Women in the Workplace 2021 report, published by McKinsey in partnership with LeanIn.
Org.
The data behind this report are based on a study of 423 companies across Canada and the United States.
The analysis built on similar research that McKinsey and LeanIn.Org have conducted annually since 2015, as well as on 2012 research from McKinsey.
Separately and in addition, more than 65,000 employees from 88 companies were surveyed on their workplace experiences.
In this 2021 Employee Experience Survey, 5,994 respondents worked in the healthcare sector (including providers, payers, and life sciences companies).
Within this group, we interviewed women of different races and ethnicities, LGBTQ+ women, and women with disabilities at all levels of their organizations, working either remotely or on-site.
For the 2021 report, data about pipeline representation were collected from March to August 2021.
These data reflect not only the representation of women and men as of December 31, 2020, but also personnel changes (for example, those resulting from promotion, hiring, and attrition) during 2020.
From June to August 2021, human-resources leaders and professionals provided information on policies, programs, and priorities at their companies.
In addition, from May to July 2021, employees were surveyed on their workplace experiences.
These data sets, representing point-in-time snapshots, reflect the responses of companies and the experiences of employees when the survey was conducted.
The nursing survey was in the field from February to March 2021 and again from November to December 2021.
A representative sample of frontline registered nurses was recruited and verified by Dynata using proprietary data from professional organizations and state licensure records.
Frontline nurses were screened to ensure that they spent at least 70 percent of their working hours delivering direct patient care and that they had at least one year of work experience.
The 396 survey responses collected from February to March 2021 and the 710 responses collected from November to December 2021 were weighted by the respondent’s primary work setting to align with the actual distribution of the nursing workforce (from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics).
However, the COVID-19 pandemic has created a seismic shift in the workforce, with a specific impact on women.
Millions of Americans have resigned from their jobs, and many have cited unmanageable workloads or a need to care for family as important factors in their decision.
The healthcare sector is no exception.
Our most recent analysis is based on the seventh annual Women in the Workplace data (for 2021), by McKinsey and LeanIn.
Org.
That research looks at drop-offs in female representation, promotion rates, and external hiring at the highest levels in healthcare; at the barriers to advancement for women of color; and at threats to recent gains (see sidebar, “About the research”).
In many cases, these outcomes are correlated with the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including reports of increased responsibilities at home and higher levels of burnout.
Parents in particular struggle with both of these problems.
For example, our analysis shows that women in healthcare are twice as likely as men to cite parenthood and increased home responsibilities as reasons for missing out on opportunities for promotion.
In previous work, we have discussed how COVID-19 could reshape the broader healthcare workforce and the potential impact of that shift on women.
In this article, we start with the good news: in 2021, women in healthcare had higher representation at the managerial level and lower rates of attrition than they did in previous years.
We also focus on the looming challenge of retention and on the risk that women of color will miss out on advancement opportunities.
Finally, we offer strategies for improving retention and representation, as well as a goal to prepare for the shift to the next normal in an era of endemic COVID-19.
Women in healthcare are twice as likely as men to cite parenthood and increased home responsibilities as reasons for missing out on opportunities for promotion.
Reasons to celebrate
As a whole, healthcare continues to outperform other sectors in the representation of women, who make up more than two-thirds of entry-level employees in healthcare organizations (Exhibit 1).
We identified three important shifts in 2021: increased representation of women at specific managerial levels, lower rates of attrition among women in healthcare than in other sectors, and increased external hiring of women at specific levels of the pipeline.
1
Increased representation
In healthcare, the representation of women at the senior-manager or director level improved by four percentage points on average, to 53 percent, in 2021.
That is 18 percentage points higher than the average across all sectors.
The gap in female representation in healthcare between managers and senior managers or directors was smaller than it had been in 2019.
Lower rates of attrition
On average, in 2021 women left jobs in healthcare at lower rates than women in other sectors, men in healthcare, and women in healthcare in previous years.
In particular, the female attrition rate at the C-suite level was approximately half of what it was in 2019 (Exhibit 2).
While many factors probably contributed to this outcome, our employee sentiment survey indicates two possible reasons: more women than men reported being somewhat or very happy with their companies, and more women than men would recommend their companies as great places to work.
In addition, fewer women of color in healthcare management roles had left by the beginning of 2021 than had in 2019.
2
Increased external hiring
Hiring from outside an organization can be one strategy to increase representation.
In 2021, external hiring of women at the manager through vice-president (VP) levels increased in healthcare from 2019.
These numbers compare favorably with the averages across all sectors, in which women account for 34 to 47 percent of external hires.
Critical challenges
Despite the reasons to celebrate women’s success in healthcare, critical challenges remain.
The ongoing stress of the COVID-19 pandemic threatens to undo progress in promotion and attrition rates, potentially setting female representation and advancement in healthcare back by several years.
If women leave the workforce, miss out on promotions, or both, that will hinder efforts to reach gender parity in the C-suite.
We examine three crucial areas: drop-offs in representation at specific levels of the pipeline, in promotion rates, and in external hiring; barriers to advancement for women of color; and potential threats to recent gains in female representation, including increased home responsibilities and levels of burnout, correlated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Drop-offs in representation at specific levels of the pipeline
The representation of women declines at each successive step, from the entry level (67 percent) to the C-suite (29 percent).
Representation drops particularly sharply—by eight to 11 percentage points—at each level from manager to senior vice president (SVP).
Clearly, promotion rates, retention, and external hiring have not kept pace to improve representation at more senior management levels.
While promotion rates for women in healthcare were on average on par with or slightly lower than those for men through the SVP level, the gap between men and women was larger in the C-suite (Exhibit 3).
Previously, women had been promoted at higher rates to the SVP and C-suite levels: an 8.3 percent promotion rate for women to the C-Suite in 2019, compared with 0.8 percent in 2021.
This effect can compound over time, resulting in lower representation for women at the highest levels.
3
External hiring is one of the quickest strategies to increase the representation of women at the top.
There is room for improvement here: external hiring of women in healthcare is on par with the share of women already in healthcare organizations, and men account for a larger share of external hires than women from the VP level through the C-suite (Exhibit 4).
External hiring of women in C-suite positions in particular decreased to 33 percent in 2021, from 42 percent in 2019.
Across all sectors, women make up 36 percent of external hires.
As a result, current external-hiring trends are likely to further widen the gaps in female representation, especially in senior levels.
4
Barriers to advancement for women of color
In healthcare, women of color make up almost a fourth of entry-level positions but occupy only 5 percent of C-suite ones.
The attrition rates for women of color at the level of manager (28 percent) and senior manager or director (17 percent) are particularly alarming.
Attrition among women of color at the entry levels will probably hurt representation at more senior levels in future years.
Compared with White women, White men, or men of color, proportionally more women of color reported spending time on diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) efforts, but they are the least likely to say that these efforts are well resourced at their companies.
They also are the least likely to report that their managers consistently created an environment where people can discuss challenging topics.
Respondents to our survey said that they frequently do not feel supported in their DEI work—in fact, 16 percent of women reported that when they spoke out against bias, they experienced retaliation.
A larger share of women than of men reported taking on DEI work.
Fifty-one percent of women said that they carved out time to learn about the experiences of women of color by reading, listening to podcasts, or attending events.
Only 35 percent of men did.
Pandemic fallout
In the COVID-19 era, employed women have faced increasing pressures and challenges, according to results from our employee experience survey.
Women across all sectors have shouldered more household responsibilities, and more women reported feelings of burnout.
The problems are seemingly more acute for women in healthcare, who have fewer opportunities to work remotely, report feeling greater pressure to prioritize work over family, and seem to be “pushing through” burnout and missing fewer workdays than women in other sectors.
Although this may have been celebrated in moments of crisis, executives and organizations can evaluate how to encourage women in healthcare to recharge.
Otherwise, they may find that the pandemic’s headwinds are correlated with, if not causing, a more challenging path for women to become top executives in healthcare (Exhibit 5).
5
6
The employee experience survey indicates that women in healthcare feel burned out at work more frequently than men do and have missed more days of work as a result (Exhibits 6 and 7).
The recent increase of burnout levels in healthcare may raise attrition in the future.
In 2021, levels of burnout for women in healthcare resembled those of women in other sectors: across all levels, the same proportion of women (42 percent) in healthcare and all other sectors reported “often/almost always” feeling burned out at work.
However, women in healthcare appear to be pushing through this burnout: six percentage points fewer women in healthcare than in all other sectors reported that they had missed one or more days of work as a result of burnout, stress, or mental-health issues.
Over time, women who do not take time off to address their mental health may leave.
In addition, our 2021 employee experience survey found that 53 percent of women and 47 percent of men in healthcare reported feeling stressed at work in the past few months.
Thirty percent of women in healthcare reported feeling “pressured to work more” in the past few months, compared with 25 percent of men in healthcare.
As the pandemic continues, these challenges may be worsening, especially for nurses.
McKinsey’s survey of nurses, conducted in February 2021 and in November 2021, reflected the strain.
The November 2021 results indicated that more than 32 percent of surveyed nurses may leave their current positions providing direct patient care within the year—a substantial increase over 22 percent in the spring.
Of nurses reporting an intention to leave, 60 percent said that they had become more likely to do so after the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Since the pandemic began, a higher proportion of female than male nurses have said that they are likely to leave.
This finding is consistent with a recent McKinsey survey conducted across employees in healthcare and social assistance: in mid-2021, 36 percent of the respondents said that they were at least somewhat likely to leave their current jobs within the next three to six months.
Forty-two percent of the healthcare and social-assistance workers who had already quit did so without having new jobs.
7
The experience survey data paint an unprecedented picture: women are nearing a tipping point, and their professional advancement is being affected.
If these challenges are not addressed, they could jeopardize the progress that women in healthcare have made in recent years.
Actions to take
Employers can consider three specific actions to retain and promote women in healthcare: mitigate attrition; use open positions to advance DEI goals, with external hiring and equitable promotions as mechanisms for change; and maintain a deliberate focus on opportunities for women of color.
Mitigate attrition
Employers can take several steps to mitigate attrition: for example, they can ensure reasonable workloads, encourage clear boundaries for availability, and provide greater flexibility at work (such as flexible working hours, options to transition to part-time work or to a more time-flexible role, or remote-work options).
Women said that these factors could dissuade them from reducing their hours or leaving the workforce.
In addition, people-focused managers can be trained to recognize and acknowledge the additional burdens of the pandemic period and to connect team members with relevant support resources.
Appropriate steps might include communicating consistently about mental-health counseling benefits and stress management programs.
In healthcare particularly, employees may feel pressure to be available 24/7.
Thirty percent of women (and 23 percent of men) said that helping employees to set boundaries for availability would be a meaningful action for employers to take.
This is, of course, in addition to best standard-practice elements of a superior employee experience.
These include social experience (people and relationships, teamwork, and social climate), organization experience (purpose, technology, and the physical environment), and the work experience (work organization, work control and flexibility, and growth and rewards)—as described in our previous work.
Use open positions to advance DEI goals
If your company faces rising attrition rates, look at the potential opportunities: stability is a goal, but open positions can be a chance to evaluate ways of making promotions and external hiring more equitable.
As we show in our previous work on women in healthcare, helpful actions include bias training, objective criteria for evaluation and promotion, diverse slates for promotions, and greater transparency and reporting.
Requesting a diverse selection of candidates for open roles can be a powerful driver for change at every level.
When two or more women are put forward for consideration, the odds that a woman will be promoted rise dramatically.
It is equally important to ensure that women and people of color within the organization are ready now or ready soon to fill these openings.
In addition to preparing internal succession candidates, companies may want to reexamine external hiring, including whether it is an adequate component of specific recruitment efforts.
If multiple leadership roles in an organization or team are open, it is especially important to take a holistic perspective.
In these situations, think about building the best leadership team as a whole—with leaders whose perspectives, experiences, and backgrounds complement one another and reflect the broader employee, customer, or patient populations—rather than making a series of independent hiring decisions.
These senior placements are a visible signal of organizational priorities to the rest of the workforce.
Maintain deliberate focus on opportunities for women of color in healthcare
Companies may consider comprehensively examining their evaluation and promotion processes, when biases and barriers often disproportionately affect women of color.
In addition, they may pay careful attention to retaining critical talent and to addressing the reasons that women—particularly women of color at the manager, senior manager/director level—cite for reducing their workloads or for leaving.
If healthcare companies truly wish to improve the representation of women of color, they may choose to hold managers and senior leaders more accountable by making the diversity of their organizations more transparent or making diversity goals a component of performance reviews (for example, sponsorship of lower-tenured colleagues from underrepresented groups).
No matter their gender, race, or career dreams, healthcare workers join the sector with a desire to help people recover from illness and to live healthy lives.
Yet the past two years have taken a toll on employees, and in particular those on the front lines of the pandemic.
Gender parity and proportionate representation of women of color in healthcare at the top levels remains aspirational.
Although there are reasons to celebrate, healthcare stakeholders may consider what they can do to rebalance the scales.
While we cautiously watch the experience of women in healthcare during the ongoing pandemic, we feel optimistic about the healthcare sector’s potential to remain a leader in the representation and experience of diverse leaders.
Paula Conrad, MSN, RN, CNL, CIC, a natural problem solver, is a key member of the Infection Prevention Control team at Boston Children’s Hospital.
(Michael Goderre/Boston Children's Hospital)
The Infection Prevention Control (IPC) team at Boston Children’s Hospital plays an important role in the management of all infectious disease events.
Its focus is to maintain a safe environment for patients, families, and staff.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the IPC department responded to a novel influenza pandemic and prepared extensively for patients with the Ebola virus, who fortunately never arrived.
That experience was pivotal in the IPC’s ability to meet the demands of COVID-19.
However, despite this past experience, COVID-19 presented new and significant challenges for the IPC team and the organization.
The global COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 required a true system-wide response.
IPC met with Emergency Management, epidemiologists, and medical directors on a regular basis as part of the Hospital Incident Command System (HICS).
HICS helps health-care organizations improve emergency management planning.
IPC leadership was instrumental in policy creation and decision-making.
Throughout this crisis, everyone worked together and leaders emerged to take on new challenges.
Emerging leadership
Paula Conrad, MSN, RN, CNL, CIC, a Level II infection preventionist, gained clinical expertise and a growing commitment to the field of infection prevention when she served for several years as the unit-based infection control nurse for the Medical Intensive Care Unit (MICU) at Boston Children’s.
She transitioned to the IPC department in 2019 and emerged as a strong leader and key contributor during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Infections prevented often translate directly into quality improvement and lives saved.”
Conrad drew upon her experiences as the clinical coordinator in the MICU to evolve and meet the new leadership challenges.
“I have really grown in my ability to be flexible and change course quickly to meet competing demands,” she says.
Creating solutions
The IPC team staffed the hospital’s Command Center, working from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m., and responded to urgent information needs and requests for assistance as they arose.
In all, 1,169 COVID-19 issues were logged and addressed through the HICS structure from 2021 to 2022.
At certain points, the IPC pager volume was so high that the team needed to rotate coverage every 12 hours.
As a result, IPC created a buddy system pairing infection preventionists to share pager responsibilities.
When Conrad’s partner was a new staff member, she became a peer mentor and coach, serving as a source of support and knowledge.
A natural problem solver, Conrad wanted to improve departmental workflow and reduce the strains felt within the IPC’s small team of infection prevention specialists.
She spent time reviewing the many processes in place to identify redundancies or inefficiencies.
Next, Conrad brought solutions to the team and together they discussed ideas and developed new solutions.
For example, Conrad successfully streamlined how IPC managed COVID-19 order entry and results.
Then she trained a team to handle that process so the rest of the IPC could focus on other COVID-related and infection control responsibilities.
Conrad also co-led weekly calls for COVID-19 information specialists from various hospital departments to keep them updated on policies and procedures, and to answer any questions.
Even as the pandemic recedes, IPC continues to provide a high level of support across the enterprise.
Professional advancement
At Boston Children’s Hospital, there is an established nursing professional advancement model (Level I, II and III), which provides direct-care registered nurses the opportunity to expand their skills and receive additional compensation following a formal review process.
Conrad took advantage of the nursing clinical ladder program and advanced to staff nurse Level III.
However, there was not an established clinical ladder for infection preventionists who are prepared not only as registered nurses but in a wide range of fields.
Jennifer Ormsby, DNP, PNP, CPN, CIC, IPC director, truly values professional advancement and wanted to provide a similar opportunity akin to the nursing advancement model for infection preventionists.
In 2020, Dr. Ormsby, Conrad and Celeste Chandonnet, MSN, RN, CCRN-K, CIC, infection preventionist II, collaborated to develop the infection preventionist clinical ladder.
They used the Association for Professionals in Infection Prevention (APIC) competency model and the Boston Children’s nursing clinical ladder as frameworks.
They created both a policy and related job descriptions, as well as a competency grid describing the criteria to advance from IP Level I to II to III.
Conrad has since obtained her infection control certification and advanced to IP Level II.
Hopes for the future
“Infection Prevention and Control is a unique specialty and provides incredible opportunities for quality improvement and research,” says Conrad.
“Our department is involved in so many exciting projects, both within the hospital and in collaboration with other institutions.
I hope to contribute to this work, and to the profession at large, in a meaningful way — knowing that infections prevented often translate directly into quality improvement and lives saved.”
As we close out our third summer of the COVID pandemic, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has authorized the first set of updated COVID vaccine boosters.
The new boosters target the most recent dominant subvariants of the coronavirus and can help keep you protected as we all begin to gather inside once more.
Below, we answer some of your most pressing questions about the new COVID boosters.
Who is eligible for the new COVID booster?
In order to be eligible to receive an updated COVID booster, you must:
Have completed the primary series of the COVID vaccine (two doses of Pfizer/BioNTech, Moderna, or Novavax COVID vaccines or a single dose of the Johnson & Johnson COVID vaccine).
Have NOT had a COVID shot in the past two months
Be 18 or older to get the new Moderna COVID booster
Be 12 or older to receive the new Pfizer/BioNTech COVID booster (Note: people age 12-18 can no longer receive the original COVID boosters.)
If you’ve previously had one of the original COVID boosters, you may still get an updated booster – as long as you meet the COVID booster criteria above, which were set by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
When can I get an updated COVID booster?
The updated COVID boosters are available now and are being shipped nationwide.
Where can I get an updated COVID booster near me?
The Monroe County Department of Public Health is offering free COVID booster clinics at various community locations and events for those 12 and older.
Learn more about Monroe County COVID vaccine appointments and register to get an updated COVID booster.
You can also search for availability at your local pharmacy via www.vaccines.gov.
How long after the COVID booster are you immune?
Generally, people with healthy immune systems are protected from infection for three to four months after receiving a COVID booster, but protection from severe illness lasts eight months to a year.
If you’ve had a COVID vaccine and a natural infection, you will be immune longer.
What’s different about the new COVID boosters?
There are two updated COVID boosters available: one produced by Pfizer/BioNTech and another produced by Moderna.
Both boosters contain some of the original COVID vaccine formula, but also target the omicron subvariants, BA.4 and BA.5, which have caused the majority of COVID cases in the U.S. since early July.
How long should I wait between getting a flu shot and the new COVID booster?
According to the CDC, there is no need to wait between getting a flu shot and COVID vaccine.
It is safe to get a COVID vaccine or booster at the same time as a flu vaccine or other vaccines – and the CDC recommends you get both.
September and October are good times to get a flu vaccine.
How long after having COVID can I get the booster?
To take advantage of the natural immune boost provided by infection, it is generally a good idea to wait about three months after having COVID to get a COVID booster.
However, immune responses vary from person to person and depend on which viral variant you were infected with, so it’s always best to discuss with your physician.
COVID cases are low in my area.
Do I need a booster?
Should I wait for cases to rise?
Getting a COVID booster is certainly not as urgent as getting the primary COVID vaccine, but there’s no need to wait if you currently meet the criteria recommended by the CDC (listed above).
Generally, we expect COVID cases to increase again in the fall as people begin to gather indoors, but you shouldn’t wait for that to happen.
If more people get boosted now, we might prevent some of those fall cases.
Will this booster protect me better than the original?
We hope that targeting the new boosters toward more recent subvariants of the coronavirus will make them more effective against future variants, but we can’t say for sure that they will.
We don't know what variants will be circulating at any given time.
We anticipate that the omicron BA.4 and BA.5 subvariants will continue to circulate for a time, but it’s quite unpredictable.
Will I need to get a new COVID booster each year?
It is likely that more COVID boosters will be needed in the future, though we can’t say for sure whether they will be an annual occurrence or how far into the future they will be needed.
That’s why we are currently conducting several COVID vaccine-related clinical trials.
One trial, called COVAIL (COVID Variant Immunologic Landscape), is testing the safety and effectiveness of different COVID vaccine regimens – prototype and variant vaccines alone or in combination.
Another Phase 1 trial is testing new intranasal COVID vaccines.
Learn more about these and other studies at covidresearch.urmc.edu or call (585) 273-3990.
How to interpret the data: Crude death rates are the actual number of deaths per 100,000 people in each racial and ethnic group (left side of chart).
In comparison, the age-adjusted deaths per 100,000 are calculated for each racial and ethnic group (right bar chart).
Missing bars indicate groups with insufficient data for the analysis.
What we found: The APM Research Lab data show that crude COVID-19 mortality rates are similar for Black Kansans and lower for Latino Kansans compared to White Kansans.
The age-adjusted COVID-19 mortality rate for Latino and Black Kansans was 1.7 times higher than the age-adjusted COVID-19 mortality rate for White Kansans (527 and 518 compared to 303, respectively).
While not shown due to the smaller sample sizes in Kansas, the U.S. data also showed higher age-adjusted COVID-19 mortality rates among Pacific Islander and Indigenous population groups than White individuals.
The results are consistent with the risk for COVID-19 death by race and ethnicity published by the CDC.
The vaccine effectiveness (VE) of the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine was 79.5% among US adolescents before the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant emerged, but the monoclonal antibody combo tixagevimab and cilgavimab showed little benefit for nonhospitalized COVID patients, according to two randomized, controlled trials published today in JAMA Network Open.
3 vs 14 infections per 100 person-years
In an ongoing expansion of the phase 3 randomized, controlled PREVENT-19 trial, a team led by Novavax researchers assessed the neutralizing antibody response to the vaccine among 2,232 adolescents aged 12 to 17 years enrolled at 73 sites from April 26 to June 5, 2021.
The study had previously shown efficacy among 18- to 25-year-olds.
Participants were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive either two intramuscular Novavax injections or a saline placebo 21 days apart, and serum samples were collected on days 0 and 35.
The adolescents also reported adverse events in an electronic diary for 7 days after each injection and were followed for 28 days after the second dose.
The average age among 1,487 Novavax recipients and 745 in the placebo group was 13.8 years, 52.5% were boys, 74.4% were White, and 16.1% had previously tested positive for COVID-19.
The ratio of neutralizing antibody geometric mean titers in adolescents compared with 18- to 25-year-olds was 1.5 (95% confidence interval
[CI], 1.3 to 1.7).
A total of 20 mild COVID-19 infections were identified after a median of 64 days of follow-up, including 6 cases among Novavax recipients (incidence, 2.90; 95% CI, 1.31 to 6.46 cases per 100 person-years) and 14 cases among the placebo group (incidence, 14.20; 95% CI, 8.42 to 23.93 cases per 100 person-years), for a VE of 79.5% (95% CI, 46.8% to 92.1%).
VE against the Delta variant, the only strain identified through whole-genome sequencing, was 82.0% (95% CI, 32.4% to 95.2%).
Most adverse events were mild to moderate, were transient, and occurred more often after the second Novavax dose.
Serious adverse events were rare, and their occurrence was similar in both groups (15.9% in vaccine recipients vs 15.6% in the placebo group).
No deaths or cases of anaphylaxis, Guillain Barre syndrome, blood clots, myocarditis, or pericarditis occurred, and no participants disenrolled from the study owing to adverse events.
"The vaccine is expected to increase uptake in adolescents, more than 22% of whom have not yet received a full vaccination regimen with mRNA vaccines," the study authors wrote.
"A favorable safety profile, convenient storage and transportation requirements, and induction of broad, cross-reactive immune responses with the potential to provide protection against new variants suggest that NVX-CoV2373
[Novavax] offers an important choice for vaccination of younger individuals in the fight against the current COVID-19 pandemic worldwide.
"
Most adverse events were mild to moderate, were transient, and occurred more often after the second Novavax dose.
In the United States, Novavax is authorized for emergency use among people aged 12 years and older.
Monoclonal antibodies show only modest benefit
Two phase 2 randomized, controlled, University of Washington-led clinical trials that were part of the Accelerating COVID-19 Therapeutic Interventions and Vaccines (ACTIV)–2/A5401 platform evaluated the safety and efficacy of the long-acting monoclonal antibody combination tixagevimab-cilgavimab given intramuscularly (IM) or intravenously (IV) to nonhospitalized US adults with recent COVID-19 symptom onset from February 1 to May 31, 2021, before the emergence of Delta or Omicron.
A total of 229 adults were randomly assigned for the IM study, and 119 were assigned to the IV study.
The primary modified intention-to-treat group included 223 participants assigned to receive either IM tixagevimab-cilgavimab (106 participants) or placebo (117) with a median age of 39 years and 114 assigned to receive the combo IV (58 participants) or placebo (56) with a median age of 44 years.
Participants enrolled a median of 6 days after COVID-19 symptom onset.
Most were unvaccinated.
Enrollment in the IV study was stopped early based on a decision to focus on the IM product.
No significant differences were seen in time to symptom improvement for IM or IV tixagevimab-cilgavimab versus placebo.
A greater percentage of participants in the IM treatment group had nasopharyngeal SARS-CoV-2 RNA levels below the lower limit of quantification on day 7 than placebo recipients (80.2% vs 64.6%; adjusted risk ratio, 1.33) but not on days 3 or 14.
A joint test across all time points favored treatment.
No such differences were seen for IV treatment versus placebo.
No safety signals were observed with IM or IV treatment.
"Therapeutic options for COVID-19 remain limited," the researchers wrote.
"At present, there are no mAbs
[monoclonal antibodies] available with activity against the circulating SARS-CoV-2 variants.
Our findings support IM thigh administration of mAbs, a route that should be considered in development of mAbs for SARS-CoV-2 infection."
Simultaneous administration of a COVID-19 mRNA booster shot and the seasonal influenza vaccine slightly increased the risk of systemic reactions during the following week compared with a booster shot alone, but most of the reactions were mild, a retrospective cohort study shows.
"Local injection site reactions, such as pain and redness, and systemic reactions, such as fever and muscle aches, are common reactions to many types of vaccines but are generally mild and resolve quickly," Anne Hause, PhD, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, Georgia, told Medscape Medical News in an email.
"So the CDC continues to recommend that COVID-19 vaccines may be administered without regard to timing of other vaccines, including the COVID-19 booster and flu vaccination at the same visit," added Hause, the lead author.
The study was published online July 15 in JAMA Network Open.
Dual Vaccination, Double Protection
In an invited commentary, Kathyrn Hall, PhD, MPH, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, and colleagues also argue in favor of concomitant administration of a COVID-19 booster and influenza vaccine.
Coadministration could support uptake of both vaccines, they note, and it could augment protection against both infectious diseases.
"Vaccine coadministration could also introduce efficiencies in currently overburdened health care settings," they write.
Moreover, a 2021 phase 4 trial that evaluated the simultaneous administration of the Pfizer BioNTech and influenza vaccines raised no safety concerns.
"Nationally, during the 2020 to 2021 season, influenza vaccination coverage was only 50.2%," Hall and colleagues point out.
Thus, despite the slightly elevated risk of systemic events with dual vaccination, public health campaigns to increase dual vaccination should be undertaken, along with efforts to provide both vaccines in clinical and community-based settings, they write.
"Given the small increase in rate of adverse events reported by Hause et al, health care systems should be encouraged to develop routine and streamlined processes for coadiministration of these vaccinations," they state.
They also note that clinical trials have found reactogenicity to vaccination is not wholly attributable to the contents or the delivery of a vaccine but to so-called "nocebo" effects prompted by anxiety and expectation of adverse events on the part of recipients.
V-Safe Study
To probe the safety of simultaneous vaccination, Hause and her colleagues turned to v-safe, the large CDC vaccine surveillance self-report registry.
Of nearly one million participants in the smartphone-based monitoring system, 92,023 received a seasonal influenza vaccine together with either the Pfizer BioNTech or the Moderna booster between September 2021 and May 2022.
The booster was defined as the third dose of the COVID-19 mRNA vaccine given at least 5 months after the second dose.
In the week following dual vaccination, 58.9% of respondents who received the Pfizer BioNTech COVID-19 booster plus the flu shot and 68.6% of those who received the Moderna COVID-19 booster shot plus the flu shot reported mild to moderate reactions.
The most common reactions were fatigue, headache, and myalgia, the authors note.
After controlling for sex, age, and week of vaccination, respondents who simultaneously received the Pfizer BioNTech booster and the flu shot were found to have an 8% increased risk of having a systemic reaction (adjusted odds ratio [aOR], 1.08; 95% CI, 1.06 – 1.10), compared to those who received the mRNA booster alone.
Those who received the Moderna booster shot had an 11% increased risk of having a systemic reaction (aOR, 1.11; 95% CI, 1.08 – 1.14), compared to those who received the booster alone.
The slight increase in reactions to the paired vaccinations had little health impact with the Moderna booster and none with the Pfizer BioNTech COVID-19 booster, as measured by normal daily activities, an inability to work or attend school, or the need for medical care, telehealth, a clinic or emergency visit, or hospitalization.
"Providers should offer their patients all age-appropriate recommended vaccines and counsel patients that some people experience reactions like fever, body aches or tiredness more frequently after receiving more than one vaccine," Hause told Medscape Medical News.
"But [if they do develop] symptoms, symptoms can be managed with an antipyretic or analgesic medication," she added.
Hause noted that the CDC does not recommend that patients take an antipyretic or analgesic medication prior to receiving a vaccine to prevent post-vaccination symptoms, largely because it's not certain whether these medications can affect the immune response to vaccination.
"However, these medications may be taken after vaccination to treat symptoms," she said.
She cautioned that aspirin is not recommended for persons younger than 18 years because of the risk of Reye's syndrome.
Hause and Hall have disclosed no relevant financial relationships.
JAMA Netw Open.
Published online July 15, 2022.
Full text, Commentary
For more news, follow Medscape on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and YouTube.
